Introduction
Drug shortages pose a significant public health threat according to bodies such as the American Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [ ]. Within the last few years, efforts have been made by companies, public authorities, and academia to introduce more robust processes in order to increase agility, flexibility, and reliability [ , ]. Continuous production is one possible direction to improve pharmaceutical manufacturing in this regard [ ]. However, changing production processes may have direct impacts on supply chain strategy, especially because the manufacturing of a pharmaceutical drug is generally not performed at one manufacturing site alone but within the global production of large pharmaceutical corporates. The globally dispersed, consecutive production steps often lead to a supply chain cycle time of around 100–300 days [ ]. Hence, in order to holistically improve the robustness of drug supply, supply chain management capabilities must be increased together with advanced and more robust production processes. The goal of this paper is to develop a decision support tool in order to provide supply chain decision-makers with a practical solution for better planning of warehouse capacities in a practical way and in greater detail than is available today.
This issue was initially brought to academia by industry partners and validated within an embedded case study. In the pharmaceutical industry, high-level planning no longer meets requirements when dealing with warehouse capacity. Warehouse space requirements are calculated by global decision-makers in a very simplified way. This may lead to great inaccuracy because of issues such as the variation of products’ logistics requirements within the product portfolio. For example, among other factors, the required temperature zone, packaging size, and additional administration devices influence packaging volume. In addition, local warehouse managers are often unaware of the logistics requirements of future product portfolios that are considered by global decision-makers and instead frequently use simple tools such as linear approximations based on past usage in order to consider future developments. This whole practice is inefficient for several reasons: local knowledge is not spread within the company, the forecast accuracy is not tracked and is difficult to determine, and significant effort is necessary for data gathering and evaluation. Previous publications emphasize the challenges of a high amount of information being stored in different formats and different computer tools at pharmaceutical companies [ ]. This also hold for supply chain-related data. Consequently, logistics is reactive. This is an especially critical issue because logistics processes are often inflexible in this industry: it can take 1–2 years to extend capacities, and short-term outsourcing is often not possible because of strict regulations. The different models used by local and global decision-makers within a company hinder the required visibility and exchange. Future developments such as personalized medicine and a greater share of biologics with even stricter temperature requirements and controlled warehouse spaces will intensify this problem. Shortages in capacity will also become more probable if capabilities are not extended. Hence, there is a need to gain further insights into the current processes for global decision-makers and the logistics requirements of future product portfolios for local warehouse managers. There is also a need for a holistic decision support system (DSS) supporting global decision-makers and local warehouse managers with their strategic decisions and incorporating all relevant information from areas such as product development, production, logistics, and sales. In this way, pharmaceutical companies would be enabled to engage in proactive planning.
Thus, because of the aforementioned challenges, the overarching research question is as follows: How can supply chain planning in general and warehouse capacity planning in particular be improved in order to respond to future challenges, thereby helping to ensure a reliable drug supply?
Three secondary questions are also developed in order to address this research question: SQ1: How is strategic warehouse capacity planning performed at global pharmaceutical companies (e.g., system delimitation, as-is analysis)? SQ2: What technical requirements exist for DSSs deployed in pharmaceutical companies? SQ3: In technical terms, how can a DSS be designed and implemented within an organization?
The contribution of this paper is to provide a practical solution for supply chain decision-makers in pharmaceutical companies that aims to implement a more robust strategic warehouse capacity planning process. Because of the strategic horizon, it is important to maintain an aggregated level and a practical way to gather the required input data. The methodology proposed here is described in detail in the “ Methodology ” section. “ Theoretical background ” section provides the background of the pharmaceutical industry and strategic supply chain planning processes. Based on this understanding, SQ1 is answered in the “ Warehouse capacity planning within the industry ” section. In the analysis that follows, the detailed technical requirements for a DSS are developed (SQ2). In the remainder of “ Warehouse capacity planning in the pharmaceutical industry ” section, the model is developed, and insights from the embedded case study are presented (SQ3). The findings are then incorporated in the strategic supply chain planning process with the goal of transforming warehouse planning from a reactive to a predictive function and addressing the overarching research question. We conclude with research limitations and the future outlook.
Methodology
The methodology follows a mixed methods research design that “can permit researchers to address more complicated research questions and collect a richer and stronger array of evidence than can be accomplished by any single method alone” [ ]. The initial hypothesis brought to us by industry partners was that in practice pharmaceutical companies receive insufficient support for the aforementioned challenges in the area of supply chain planning. To investigate this hypothesis and for system delimitation, a structured literature analysis was conducted as a first step in order to evaluate the theoretical background of this problem. The results are presented in the “ Theoretical background ” section.
After considering the theoretical foundation, we evaluated whether the problem setting was relevant to a broader group of companies. The problem is considered an exploratory case (for hypothesis generation) with an a priori theory that is used to select cases and the constructs to be examined [ ]. In order to provide meaningful insights into the current state of global corporations, semi-structured interviews with 11 global players were conducted. Further, the literature often refers to the special environment of the pharmaceutical industry [ ]. Thus, a homogenous group of research-based pharmaceutical companies was chosen for the series of interviews. The participants were supply chain managers from 11 of the largest 20 research-based pharmaceutical companies according to sales [ ]. The evaluation criteria were to assess the situation regarding warehouse capacity planning within this group and to establish whether best practices can be identified, thereby answering SQ1. All interviews were recorded, and the results were sent to the interview partners to check for accuracy. Follow-up interviews were scheduled as necessary.
In order to gain insights in much greater detail when developing the DSS, one company with a global production network from the group of interview partners was chosen for an in-depth case study. DSSs are interactive computer-based systems that help people to solve problems and make decisions [ ]. They are designed specifically to facilitate decision processes, support rather than automate decision-making, and respond quickly to the changing needs of decision-makers [ ]. Model-driven DSSs use decision analysis, mathematical modeling, and simulation [ ]. The case study took place over the course of one-and-a-half years. The restriction to one company was because of the size of the companies and complexity of the problem. Specifically, an embedded case study design with more than 15 global plant warehouses from one of the top 20 companies (a “common case” according to Yin) was chosen [ ]. The units of analysis were decision support methods for strategic warehouse capacity planning. Three plant warehouses were chosen as pilots. In scope of the case study were all SKUs (six-digit range) stored at the globally distributed warehouses, the different manufacturing processes (end-to-end, meaning drug substance, drug product, and finished goods) and a 3–10-year strategic planning horizon. Not in scope were warehouses not directly maintained by the pharmaceutical manufacturer (e.g., from the Contract Manufacturing Organization CMO) and short- to mid-term planning operations. The in-depth case studies enabled the researchers to identify reasons why the planning process is executed inadequately at the moment and to incorporate these findings in the further process. Within the pilot sites, different concept alternatives were evaluated with the expected outcome of refining technical requirements for a practical DSS in pharmaceutical companies (SQ2).
Based on the findings with the pilot sites, a procedure improving the warehouse capacity planning process was developed, and a corresponding DSS was designed using an analytical approach, namely, a deterministic simulation model (SQ3). Simulation models are especially relevant for more complex processes with many different products and more than one type of uncertainty [ ]. Interviews, meetings, documents, presentations, spreadsheets, field observations, and data from information systems were used and documented to “deliberately triangulate the evidence from these multiple sources, to confirm and corroborate the findings” [ ].
Theoretical Background
Pharmaceutical Supply Chains
Since this paper deals specifically with the pharmaceutical industry, a short description containing specific characteristics of the industry is given as follows. Global spending on medicines amounted to around US$989 billion in 2013 and will reach approximately US$1.3 trillion in 2018. Such figures indicate the overall size and economic importance of the pharmaceutical industry [ ]. The business environment of the pharmaceutical industry consequently receives a lot of attention from the public and government’s regulatory authorities. Pharmaceutical manufacturers can be differentiated into large R&D-based multinationals, generic manufacturers operating in the international market, local companies mostly based in one country, contract manufacturers without their own portfolios, and biotechnological companies mainly concerned with drug discovery [ ]. The product sectors of the pharmaceutical industry are differentiated by the US Census Bureau into “originator chemically-synthesized drugs,” “generic drugs,” “over-the-counter (OTC) drugs,” “pharmaceutical substances: active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) and excipients,” “biologicals,” and “biosimilars, or follow-on biologics” [ ]. This paper focuses on the first group of large research-based pharmaceutical companies. These are considered to have one of the most challenging environments for supply chain managers because of the variety of products at different stages of their life cycles, global demand, and globally dispersed production steps.
Today’s challenges for pharmaceutical manufacturers include patent expirations for key drugs, fierce price competition from generics, high regulatory hurdles, and the industry’s perceived tarnished image [ ]. Trade impediments are posed by regulatory approvals, reimbursement and pricing policies, intellectual property rights (IPR), and counterfeit medicines. Supply chain management and logistics have increasingly come into focus as a potential area for improvements. The typical pharmaceutical supply chain consists of the following steps: primary manufacturing, where the APIs are manufactured; secondary manufacturing, where the granulation, compression, coating, quality control, and packaging take place when a pill is manufactured; and warehousing and distribution [ , ]. Managing operations in this context is complex. Long lead times range from 1000 to 8000 h, while at the same time consumers ask for short delivery times [ ]. Further, a globally distributed supply chain, high quality requirements, and strict regulatory audits demand structured processes [ ]. High inventory levels are one outcome of the way in which logistics deals with this problem [ ]. Additional factors that influence required warehouse capacities include uncertainties in the research pipeline, strict temperature zones, manufacturing lot sizes, additional devices such as injectors delivered with the product thereby inflating the volume, and the number of different make-ups. Further, the share of biologic drugs is set to grow in the future, requiring even stricter temperature ranges than the chemical drugs of the past and thus more scrutinized planning [ ]. However, it can take up to 18 months to extend warehouse capacities when additional space is required. This means that dealing with this problem inadequately not only leads to a company operating at a non-optimal level but also puts the company at risk of lost sales, resulting in image deterioration. Literature that discusses tools and processes to support the industry and its special requirements is rare. For instance, Shah states that supply chain optimization has become a major research theme in general terms, but only a small part of the literature addresses the issues faced in the pharmaceutical sector [ ]. De Vries and Huijsman support this by stating that much research needs to be done in the health care domain since supply chain management in the health care industry is characterized by some unique features that make it difficult to transfer knowledge from the industrial sector to the health care sector in a direct way [ ]. Shah states that the large scale of operations in terms of activities and geographical span make planning more difficult and must be supported by future multisite planning and scheduling tools [ ]. Further, Shah identifies collaborative forecasting, planning, and inventory management across the supply chain as future research areas [ ]. He suggests that strategic planning models in the pharmaceutical industry should incorporate tactical/operational levels in order to reflect the time-based demand requirements, although these levels are usually treated in a rather aggregate form because of rapidly escalating computational burdens [ , ]. The different processes and applied tools for warehouse capacity planning are further detailed in the following section.
Supply Chain Planning and Warehouse Capacity Planning
In the following section, supply chain management, production planning, and warehouse planning will be elaborated. As defined by the Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals (CSCMP), “Supply chain management encompasses the planning and management of all activities involved in sourcing and procurement, conversion, and all logistics management activities” [ ]. One way to differentiate supply chain management literature is to consider the streams of supply network coordination, strategic purchasing, logistics integration, and supply management from which supply chain management understanding is mostly and incorrectly reduced to managing relationships with suppliers [ ]. Successful supply chain integration is expected to lower inventory, reduce the cash flow cycle time, reduce cycle times, lower material acquisition costs, increase employee productivity, increase the ability to meet customers’ requested dates, and lower logistics costs [ ]. Following this broad understanding of supply chain management, we will limit our area of investigation to strategic planning aspects and deal in particular with production and warehouse planning, which we further describe as follows.
Supply chain planning includes long-term, mid-term, and short-term tasks [ ]. Long-term strategic planning shapes the supply chain to a great extent and has a significant influence on whether a supply chain can fulfill its required service levels and profitability targets. In order to support planning, advanced planning systems (APS) have evolved using transactional data from enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems; for example, order, inventory, and master data [ ]. APS started by providing solutions for standard problems (e.g., materials requirements planning (MRP)) and advanced to today’s supply chain management (SCM) software [ ]. Planning production capacities is an important part of strategic supply chain planning, especially in the pharmaceutical industry where capacity investments are comparably high. Mula et al. provide an overview of models for production planning under uncertainty [ ]. These are differentiated into topics, namely, aggregate planning, hierarchical production planning, material requirement planning, capacity planning, manufacturing resource planning, inventory management, and supply chain planning [ ]. Within these disciplines, it is possible to distinguish artificial intelligence models, simulation models, analytical models, and conceptual models [ ]. These models consider the manufacturing capacity required and determine warehouse locations and inventory levels. The production volumes and policies strongly influence the corresponding warehouses’ operations. In addition, warehouse-planning decisions can be differentiated into strategic, tactical, and operational decisions. The degrees of freedom reduce at every subsequent planning level. Warehouse management issues, whereby managers have to decide where to assign products within the warehouse, and inventory management issues, whereby managers decide which product and how much of it must be stored in the warehouse, are often handled independently and sequentially [ ]. Inventories are a necessary downside that most companies have to accept in order to guarantee the desired service level and synchronize different needs within the supply chain (e.g., promises to customer vs. production lead time). Inventories are influenced by a variety of factors, including supply chain setup, stock organization within the supply chain (single stock and multiple stock), production yields, safety stocks, lot sizes, and order/production frequency, which in turn are influenced by inventory policy [ ]. To a certain extent, inventories are already considered in the strategic supply chain planning process (see, e.g., [ ]). However, what is missing is the impact on warehouse capacity, which is quantified much later by the warehouse manager during tactical and operational planning. This is where the current study has identified a gap.
In warehouse planning literature, an expected number of handling units (e.g., pallets per month) as an input is often assumed to be provided and used, for example, for sizing and planning different functional areas within the warehouse. Unfortunately, this required capacity data required by the warehouse managers is not currently available as an output of the strategic planning process. Warehouse capacity planning in this context should not be confused with warehouse operations or warehouse design questions. Warehouse design encompasses issues regarding overall structure, sizing and dimensioning, department layout, equipment selection, and operational strategy [ ]. Warehouse operations encompass issues from receiving to storing (stock keeping unit (SKU) department assignment, zoning and storage location assignment), order picking (batching, routing and sequencing, and sorting), and shipping [ ]. In this current study, we present a solution for warehouse capacity planning that answers the question of how much capacity (e.g., pallet spaces) is required within the different temperature zones within a warehouse for a specific strategic planning scenario. The solution is based on a series of interviews with 11 of the largest 20 research-based pharmaceutical companies according to sales and on an embedded case study with different sites of one of these companies. We note that the available data about logistics are limited and that the data exchange between operational warehouse management systems and central systems comprises a comparably small data set. Thus, assumptions about available data that are based on more supply chain-focused industries such as the automotive industry are often invalid in this context and different input data need to be considered. With regard to the modeling approach, Susarla and Karimi highlight the need for simpler models that are easy to implement and quick to solve, but do not compromise problem realism or features [ ]. This is the goal we aim to achieve with this research; hence, we mainly focus on available data and the requirements of the industry.
Warehouse Capacity Planning in the Pharmaceutical Industry
Following the literature review of pharmaceutical supply chains and strategic planning, this section presents the developed solution and findings. The requirements show the results from the interviews with 11 pharmaceutical companies followed by more details from the case study company. The developed concept proposal is structured into outputs, logical structure, and inputs to the model. In order to enable other companies to implement the solution, further insights and findings from the implementation at the case study company are described.
Warehouse Capacity Planning within the Industry
In order to answer the question of how strategic warehouse capacity planning is performed in practice at pharmaceutical companies (SQ1), a series of interviews was conducted. Figure 1 depicts a generic planning process that was derived from the literature and the answers provided by the companies. First, sales forecast planning (on the left side) is conducted and collected at a central function (e.g., headquarters). Based on this future sales data, production is planned and, if applicable, warehouse capacities are planned. The unit of measurement for warehouse capacity is pallet spaces; otherwise, planning is not considered to be on the appropriate aggregation level. Fig. 1 Production and warehouse capacity planning—results from the series of interviews
With regard to sales planning, all respondents who provided an answer perform long-range planning of between 5 and 10 years. However, the percentages do not total 100 % because not all the companies answered. In Fig. 1 , 36 % represents four companies, and 45 % represents five companies, meaning that two of the 11 companies did not provide an answer at the interviews or the follow-up with regard to long-term sales planning. More than half of the companies also engage in more detailed planning in the medium term. The companies that do not conduct medium-term planning only perform long-term planning.
Generally, the emphasis on the planning process in the pharmaceutical industry is on planning production capacities. Production equipment is expensive and comparably inflexible so that it needs to be planned with the appropriate lead time and with accuracy. Based on the sales data, which determines when the customer needs a product, production planning calculates backwards to when production needs to be started at the latest. In case there is a mismatch between the machine hours that are required (including unproductive time for changeovers, cleaning, risk reserves, etc.), an investment or outsourcing decision must be made. The mid-term horizon usually ranges up to 2 years among the respondents whereas the long-term horizon for production planning ranges up to 10 years. The companies that conduct 10-year sales forecast planning also conduct production planning for 10 years.
Medium-term warehouse capacity planning is conducted by all but one of the 11 companies. The situation looks more critical for long-term warehouse capacity planning. Most of the companies do not carry out long-range planning and no company uses a 10-year horizon. The three managers who state that they conduct long-range planning require sites to plan future warehouse capacity on a regular basis and monitor the process centrally where investment decisions are also made; thus, long-range planning generally takes place at the warehouse. In the approach used in this study, warehouse capacity planning follows a different approach and is conducted centrally.
The participants of the interviews were also asked how long they consider their warehouse capacity forecasts to be reliable. On average, this is 2.5 years with a standard deviation of approximately 1 year. Only one manager considers a planning horizon of 5 years as reliable. Different software solutions are mentioned for the overall planning process, namely, Excel, SAP, GT Nexus, JDA Planning, SharePoint, and proprietary systems. Of the interviewees, 45 % mention that the IT systems do not support long-range warehouse capacity planning well. The reasons for this are low integration, low visibility, or no long-range warehouse capacity planning in place. Additionally, participants were asked how long it takes to increase the most critical warehouse capacities. The average is 15.8 months with a standard deviation of 6.7 months. The time required to increase capacities can be strongly influenced by the types of temperature zone, whether capacity is internal or external, the internal processes, and authorities. These reasons vary according to each company. The types of storage that are the most critical to increase are cooling capacities, according to 55 % of the interviewees.
In consideration of future trends and expected developments described in the “ Theoretical background ” section, the as-is situation does not fulfill future requirements anymore. A more robust strategic warehouse capacity planning process is developed in the following sections.
Detailed Requirements Evaluation within the Case Study Company
Based on the previously introduced findings within other large pharmaceutical companies, the process was analyzed in detail within the case study company. The following challenges regarding the warehouse capacity planning process of the company were identified. First, no reporting requirement existed for the logistics managers to store historic utilization data; hence, there was nearly no past data available in the ERP or warehouse management systems (WMSs) with regard to space consumption in the warehouses for articles. Only overall space consumption was available for some warehouses. Second, the customer penetration point was very late because of a very short customer tolerance time; however, a long production lead time requires comparably high inventories. Third, many different SKUs were defined as inventory items at particular geographic locations (compare [ , ]). A significant reason for the large amount of SKUs was the different country-specific make-ups and different packaging sizes. As summarized by the Head of Logistics, the current capabilities in warehouse capacity planning were no longer sufficient and a more advanced planning process was required. This process should be able to estimate future capacity utilization based on demand and projected constraints and raise the awareness of future bottlenecks or capacity shortages. Based on the literature analysis, the series of interviews, and interviews with the global supply chain department and local warehouse managers within the case study company, the process was developed according to the following categories: (1) accuracy to be expected, (2) whether the product pipeline is considered, (3) the initial effort necessary, (4) the regular effort necessary, and (5) offered flexibility in case of future changes.
The spiral model was used in order to further specify the requirements of the process [ ]. The categories are elaborated as follows. Expected accuracy refers to the forecast quality. It should be noted that the expected accuracy level differs depending on the recipient, namely global as opposed to local teams. For example, local warehouse managers want to know specific data, but general management at headquarters is more interested in key performance indicators (KPIs) on a broader level in order to take strategic decisions (regarding expansion, reallocation, etc.). Expected accuracy mainly needs to be balanced with the required effort. The second measure, considering the product pipeline, is especially important for research-based pharmaceutical companies. Products in the research pipeline are the key to future success for such companies. This pipeline follows a tedious process until approval from the regulatory agencies. Thus, each product is connected with a specific probability for market entry. The further in the future the expected product launch, the less is known with regard to the logistics requirements of the product. A methodology needs to be defined to establish how these issues can be considered in the best way, once again balancing accuracy and effort. The required effort is differentiated into initial and regular effort. Initial effort includes the work that is necessary to build DSSs, gather required information, etc. This effort is not expected to be repeated in the future. Regular effort is always required when the process is executed. It contains tasks such as collecting forecasts or distributing and validating the results with local sites. This needs long-term commitment from the company and is thus a critical variable. The more this process can be automated, the less effort the company will have to make. Finally, flexibility expresses how flexible the process will be to react to major changes in the business; for example, the introduction of new temperature zones and containers, or changes in the supply chain setup as a result of building new plants.
Concept Proposal
After detailing the technical requirements that exist for the development of a DSS (SQ2), a conceptual model is developed within this section that answers SQ3. The discussion is generalized wherever possible and parameters are used that are common in today’s ERP systems. Nevertheless, because of the sample, generalizability cannot be guaranteed and adoption may be required. Pharmaceutical supply chain managers should be able to use the following description in order to adopt the model to their own companies.
The planning process follows a sequential approach. In the first step, the simulation model conducts rough-cut planning and identifies bottlenecks. There are two general approaches with regard to planning frequency: continuous and event-driven planning. In a continuous planning approach, a forecast is created on a regular basis (e.g., once per year), whereas with event-driven planning, relevant events trigger new planning (e.g., the launch of a new product). The concept proposed here uses both. Planning is conducted once per year, but in case issues such as warehouse capacities are influenced by new projects or unplanned changes of the production forecast, such developments serve as triggers that lead to new forecasts that analyze the impact on warehouse capacities. Further, when a bottleneck is identified by the deterministic simulation model, a detailed analysis is conducted by the concerned site.
Outputs, Logical Structure, and Inputs
The aim of the model is to offer decision support by providing greater visibility about future warehouse capacities in the global supply chain network in order to reduce the global supply chain risk exposure of pharmaceutical companies. Commercial software that uses simulation was already available in the company for production planning. These simulation results were an input for the developed DSS. Unfortunately, data with regard to warehouse spaces were mostly not available. This is partly because warehouse management systems (WMSs) that contain this data are often chosen based on the local requirements of the warehouse. For instance, the WMS will be matched to the physical systems in the warehouse rather than the compatibility with global systems. This may be optimal for local requirements and serve needs and requirements when implemented, but in the company-wide context, this could lead to significant integration efforts if the software has never been used in another warehouse before. Thus, the risk is insufficient integration with the global systems. For example, what will often be transferred to the ERP systems is information about how many products are stored in a warehouse or which products are moved in or out because departments such as global accounting need such details in order to track the value of the inventory. On the other hand, information regarding logistics performance indicators, which is important in the context of warehouse capacity planning, is not regularly tracked.
In order to achieve the described outputs, several concepts were developed, and the most promising were evaluated in detail and analyzed at pilot sites, taking into account the special requirements in the industry. For example, a forward-oriented approach on a detailed level is to formulate relationships that exploit the bill of materials, consider production specifics (lot sizes, yield, etc.), and simulate warehousing requirements based on future sales data. During the analysis with pilot sites, the effort for this approach was deemed to be too high. A second approach is to cluster products at a high level, using techniques such as production technology, and calculate the warehouse capacity requirements for specific production within these groups. For example, 50 pallets including raw and packaging materials would be required on average for production of 100,000 units within technology “A.” Unfortunately, difficulties were encountered in practice when creating these clusters because the variety of logistics requirements among the products was too high and the results were not robust. The concept that corresponded best to the evaluation criteria (see section “ Detailed requirements evaluation within the case study company ”) developed within the pilot sites and validated within the case studies is described in the following section.
The central output of this model provides an overview with regard to the available as opposed to required capacity at a level of detail that the logistics managers need (see Fig. 2 ). An explanation regarding the notation used within this section can also be found in the Appendix . Fig. 2 High-level model’s logical structure
The capacity requirements for each warehouse are differentiated by temperature, product/material class, loading units, location, and scenario. This differentiation is important for the decision-maker for various reasons. The distinction by temperature zones (z) is necessary because such zones cannot generally be interchanged quickly. In addition, a strict temperature range is required nowadays for most products. By differentiating according to product/material class (s), the decision-maker will be able to evaluate at the end which classes are the most critical. This is especially important in order to estimate the impact of changes within the supply chain processes; for example, how many pallets of packaging material are involved when the packaging step for a group of materials is moved from one plant to another. Details with regard to loading units (n) mean that the model will differentiate between items such as tanks and pallets. Besides the network focus, it must also be possible to analyze different locations/plants (w) separately. When noticing temporarily over-utilized plants in one business region, this differentiation enables the supply chain managers to evaluate temporary solution strategies; for example, push/pull from one plant to another. Lastly, to cope with the uncertainties and probabilities of product launches, scenario analysis (using sales planning scenarios α ) is a proven method to test for sensitivity in such an uncertain environment. Additional parameters related to data cleaning are considered and further specified later in this section.
In Fig. 2 (left side), the composition of the available capacity C nwz (t) is depicted. This is calculated by the available internal and external capacity differentiated by site, temperature zone, and unit of measurement for storage containers. It is time-based (t) in order to prevent bottlenecks appearing even though a change in capacity is already planned for in the planning horizon. The main challenge is calculating the required capacity \( {B}_{n{p}_dsw\mathrm{z}}^{\alpha }(t) \) with a reasonable effort. Referring to Fig. 1 , the planned production volumes (expressed as aggregated yearly demand in units per year) can be used as an input from sales and production planning. These data are sufficient for production planning because it is known how many units per time period a machine can produce (note: we simplify here because in practice other factors such as the number of shifts, changeover times, etc. also have to be considered). In order to calculate warehouse capacity, though, additional logistics-related factors need to be considered because peak inventories and variability become more relevant.
The proposed approach used to estimate the required capacity is backward-oriented, meaning that it uses past logistics data to derive future requirements. It considers the warehouse operations as a black box, but assumes a causal relationship between the number of produced products per year and required pallet spaces. The reason for not breaking down the operations to a detailed level is that it is impractical to evaluate all processes from the sites that influence inventories (e.g., lot size policy, safety stocks, and events to push/pull inventories to the next site). In addition, considering all these policies may still lead to an underestimation of the actual inventories if the site does not strictly follow them and pursues actions such as taking larger safety stocks than are necessary (a circumstance that is often mentioned in the literature as applicable to the pharmaceutical industry). Instead, our goal is to identify the influencing factors for inventories that have the greatest impact and that are, in the best case, already tracked in the ERP systems. Identified data that can be used from the central systems are the inventory per month (in units, not pallets) \( {I}_{u{p}_dsw}(m) \) and the production data \( {P}_{u{p}_dsw}(m) \) of the last year. These input values are used by the model to derive the impact of production volumes on the inventories. Policies such as lot sizes and push/pull, or more specifically their realization, are thereby considered implicitly. The result is the average/maximum inventory at the sites based on specific production outputs. Instead of using the bill of materials (BOM) in order to assign the intermediate products to the end products, master data are used. By utilizing this information together with the knowledge of the sequence of production steps h ss ′ , a simplified and practical rough assignment can be completed by the model without exploiting all BOMs. A small percentage of the remaining generic inventories that are not assigned yet (e.g., office supplies or laboratory consumables) are distributed among end products based on the end product’s current number of occupied pallet spaces (e.g., a product group that occupies a large percentage of the pallet spaces in the warehouse is also responsible for a large percentage of consumables). With this assignment successfully completed, the model estimates how many pallets were used for a specific production in the past at a specific site. The variable \( {q}_{{\mathrm{p}}_4ww\prime } \) is required to improve the accuracy of this assignment by considering interdependencies between the plants (see Appendix ).
As a next step, the production forecasts \( {\mathrm{D}}_{e_d\mathrm{w}\mathrm{s}\mathrm{u}}^{\alpha }(t) \) are required. Based on how much inventory was required in the past for a specific production output, the expected inventory based on future production is derived. Using data backtesting, different scaling factors are included (e.g., inventories must not increase by factor 2 if production increases by factor 2). The results are the expected future inventories in units.
Warehousing requirements are then derived from the number of expected inventory units. To achieve this, data from the operational WMSs must be utilized in strategic planning: specifically, how many units are on one pallet on average/maximum \( {l}_{{\mathrm{p}}_d\mathrm{w}\mathrm{n}\mathrm{u}} \) . This link from operational systems to strategic planning is generally not given and is the most difficult information to implement on a global scale. The reasons are the global character, different purposes of usage, and the non-availability of the data. Different sites use different WMSs for managing their operations. The information about how many units fit on a pallet may not even be available for the local WMS and may have to be derived by inventory in units available at the warehouse divided by the number of occupied pallets. Other specifics (e.g., one WMS using a measure of 1000 units and another WMS using single units) that can potentially distort the results must also be taken into account. Thus, a validity/data cleaning check is of the utmost importance. An interesting finding that came up during validity checks was that some warehouses in very space sensitive regions place different material numbers on one pallet while other regions, e.g., in the US would not behave in this way. In case the impact of these policies was significant, these additional policies were added to the calculations. Another example of additional data is information regarding new products in the pipeline. So far, the approach is based on the past, and no information regarding the logistics requirements of new products is given. If no information regarding such requirements is yet available, existing products are assigned to new products that are similar based on what is already known about production/logistics characteristics. This information is stored in table \( {f}_{p_dw} \) . Other data cleaning steps will replace wrong and missing data by using the model’s estimates based on best knowledge in order to overestimate rather than underestimate future capacity, which is aligned with the importance of a high service level. For the data cleaning steps, datasets for the same product that are available from different sites can be used and compared in order to identify false data. Further, information such as country-specific packaging make-ups or packaging sizes are used as inputs in the model to identify similarities among different products in order to complement missing product data. The final result is the expected demand of storage places \( {B}_{n{p}_dsw\mathrm{z}}^{\alpha }(t) \) within the planning horizon. These can be checked against the capacity available at the sites C nwz (t) in order to identify bottlenecks.
In the presented DSS, two main software suites are used. For the previously described calculations, Mathworks’ Matlab was chosen as a software running on a 256GB RAM machine with 4 × 8 core Intel Xeon E5-4620. The execution time for all calculations was up to 24 h. The main inputs \( {I}_{u{p}_dsw}(m) \) , \( {P}_{u{p}_dsw}(m) \) , and \( {q}_{{\mathrm{p}}_4ww\prime } \) are available in the ERP systems while \( {\mathrm{D}}_{e_d\mathrm{w}\mathrm{s}\mathrm{u}}^{\alpha }(t) \) and h ss ′ together with corresponding master data come from the software used for strategic production planning. Data not available within these systems (C nwz (t), \( {f}_{p_dw} \) , \( {l}_{{\mathrm{p}}_d\mathrm{w}\mathrm{n}\mathrm{u}} \) ) had to be prepared by the individual local warehouse managers. The effort for extracting the various inputs is estimated to be less than 1 hour for most inputs except the loading units \( {l}_{{\mathrm{p}}_d\mathrm{w}\mathrm{n}\mathrm{u}} \) which were by far the biggest challenge at the moment: This data was not available centrally and took up to one working day per warehouse to evaluate. The effort is expected to reduce with further repetitions in the future.
For gathering the inputs as well as analyzing the outputs, Microsoft Excel is used providing an easier access to the user. The user is able to differentiate the output (yearly demand of warehouse capacity within the next 3–10 years) with regard to temperature zone, specific sites, material class, loading units or specific product families and is also able to apply three sales planning scenarios (optimistic, realistic and pessimistic) in order to rate the robustness of the model and to decide whether investments in additional capacity might be necessary. In case the centrally executed model shows a bottleneck for specific sites, the local site is informed in order to verify the result and to develop mitigation strategies when necessary. The implementation led to more than 2000 in Matlab and more than 8000 lines of code in MS Excel.
Insights from the Case Study
In the following, findings from the development and implementation of the concept within the case study company are described. This section provides help for managers who want to implement the model within their own companies to enable them to profit from the gained experiences within the embedded case study. Within the supply network of the case study company, only warehouses directly connected to the production plants were considered. The reason is that these are the most critical ones for the warehouse managers since the degree of outsourcing increases within the distribution centers whereas the warehouses at the production site are often managed internally. Within the companies from the series of interviews, the level of outsourcing was 36 % for drug substance production, 30 % for drug product production, 22 % for packaging, but 79 % for the distribution centers, indicating that the last step is outsourced by most of the companies.
Mainly two kinds of input data were required: warehouse-related data to determine the capacity available and product-related data to determine the capacity required (see section “ Outputs, logical structure, and inputs ” or the left and right side of Fig. 2 ). Warehouse-related data is either available in ERP systems or has to be added manually by local warehouse experts. In the company, a pre-structured spreadsheet containing information about how much (internal and external) warehouse space is available within the different temperature zones at the plants, and whether an extension or reduction of the capacities is already planned within the planning horizon, satisfied the requirements. One of the main challenges for implementing the concept within the strategic planning process is the availability of logistics data on an operational level. The product-related data (required capacity) was consequently more challenging to gather. As mentioned in section “ Detailed requirements evaluation within the case study company ,” this could be because there was no reporting need within the company for operational logistics data to the extent that is required by the new concept. Because it is not globally available, the required information was manually collected in spreadsheets as an input for the model. During the collection process, it became obvious that local sites did not necessarily store historic operational data. Again, one probable reason was that there was no requirement to do so, and such data storage only became necessary with the implementation of the new planning process. This led to the challenge that it was not possible to establish information such as how many units of a specific product fitted on a pallet if the product was no longer in stock during the data extraction period. If it was available during the data extraction process, the data could be approximated (number of products in stock divided by the number of pallets in stock). The conclusion is that in warehouses where this data are either not stored or maintained, data extraction must be repeated several times during the year in order to cover the whole product portfolio and extract reliable data. In the long run, it has to be decided whether this information has to be integrated in the ERP systems and regularly maintained.
In the literature, it is often mentioned that the social perspective/human behavior has to be considered even in an analytical approach such as the case here [ ]. These experiences within the embedded case study will now be discussed. Because of its strategic nature, the development of the DSS was initiated from global headquarters. The key challenge was to activate all stakeholders and logistics managers worldwide so that they could deliver the correct input data and trust the results of the tool. During the process, two factors seemed to be especially important success factors: urgency and alignment. In a working environment where the individual is supposed to work at an increasing number of projects and tasks at the same time, a centrally steered project will attract more attention if the problems that this addresses are urgent for the individuals involved. This has to be appreciated individually by the important stakeholders. In addition, if strong involvement from middle and upper management is provided, then the local individual will more likely have to designate time to this new task. This behavior corresponds to intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. In the best case, the problem is urgent, and top management as well as other important parties trust the project to improve the situation. From experiences within the embedded case study, the results have been generally better where both success factors were fulfilled.
The developed model required various sources from many different IT systems within the company. From a software perspective, there were three groups of people identified by the researcher. The first supports a “one solution fits all” approach, meaning that they prefer that as much as possible should be included in existent ERP systems. In this situation, a significant effort is accepted. The second group wants individual solutions and is willing to introduce new software if there are slight advantages. This group is not that committed to the current software. The third group is most familiar with ad hoc solutions and aims for familiar software wherever possible. Since it was not possible to address all involved parties, a compromise was chosen, and the solution was implemented for ad hoc solutions as a prototype and will be implemented with more sophisticated software in case this proves successful.
Implications for a Supply Chain Planning Process
We suggest that the strategic supply chain planning process is not fulfilling warehouse managers’ demands for planning accuracy in the pharmaceutical industry. The proposed concept developed in this paper will enable companies to proactively consider the impact of strategic decisions on warehouse capacity. To achieve this, the concept must be implemented within the overall strategic supply chain planning process.
Within this research, the following weakness of the current planning process is identified: the lack of data transparency within the larger research-based pharmaceutical companies. However, collaboration among departments is also limited in other industries. Davarzani and Norrman, who analyze different sectors, say that their respondents claim that collaboration among warehousing and other departments such as purchasing is limited [ ]. During interviews within the case study company, local warehouse managers complained that they are informed too late about changes in the forecasts and that logistics-relevant data requirements are missing. For example, if a new product is introduced, information about logistics parameters such as packaging size, temperature requirements, and additional appliance devices within the package are provided too late to the warehouse managers. In the case of new large product launches with critical temperature requirements, the warehouses can quickly run out of capacity, and project teams have to be set up to develop firefighting solutions. Further, when decisions are to be made about extensions, warehouse space requirements for the next years have to be assessed. These are evaluated in spreadsheet files that are often created ad hoc.
Another example that was mentioned by an interviewee is when his company decided to change the future target safety stock levels. This was the result of a risk analysis and intended as a risk mitigation strategy. This situation is aligned with production capacities because these have to produce additional volumes in order to increase safety stock levels. Again, the quantification of the impact on warehouse capacities is done much later in the process. This is probably because of the larger overall cost impact when changing production capacities. However, this is not a sustainable solution for the future when considering the risks involved. In the context of even stricter regulations and trends such as an increasing share of temperature sensitive biologics products and personalized medicine, warehouse capacities need to be considered earlier in the process in order to reduce the risk of shortages.
This appropriate level of detail of warehouse capacity planning should be established directly at the strategic planning level together with the planning of production capacities. Integrating the model developed in Section “ Warehouse capacity planning in the pharmaceutical industry ” into the strategic planning process will consistently provide a long-term overview about warehouse capacity implications. To achieve this, warehouse capacities will have to be considered at the same time as production capacities so that interdependencies can immediately be seen and warehouse managers aligned early in the process. Strategic and tactical warehouse capacity planning would then profit. A drawback is that much scientific work on production planning and scheduling in process industries has focused on designing dedicated algorithms, whereas in practice companies tend to implement commercially available standard software packages ([ , ]). The case study company was in discussion with a vendor to implement the solution in its standard software in order to overcome this issue.
Conclusion, Limitations, and Outlook
In the present paper, a holistic strategic warehouse capacity planning approach focusing on the pharmaceutical industry is developed and validated. First, we discussed the context and narrowed down the area of investigation. Academia, for example Schwarz and Zhao, state that “relatively little has been published in the supply chain and operations management literature about health care product supply chains, in general, or pharmaceutical supply chains, in particular” [ ]. The strategic planning of warehouse capacities is an area where this present research has identified a capability gap. The present state of warehouse capacity planning within the largest 20 research-based pharmaceutical companies according to sales was then described to answer the first secondary question. In this regard, the different processes were presented in a picture of an aggregated planning process that showed the commonalities and differences among the companies. The requirements and boundaries for a planning process corresponding to the needs of this industry were derived, thereby answering secondary question two. Based on this, a DSS was designed and implemented within one of the interviewed companies, thereby answering secondary question three. Insights and implications from the case studies, especially those related to implementation, were presented. A proposal was then made to include the model in the overall strategic planning process, thus answering the overarching question of how warehouse capacity planning can be improved in order to respond to future challenges to ensure a reliable drug supply.
Some limitations must be mentioned. The focus of this analysis is limited to the largest 20 research-based pharmaceutical companies according to sales. A majority from this group was interviewed and processes as well as requirements were captured. An intense embedded case study was conducted with only one of the companies. This approach presents a shortcoming for the research. In the future, the developed model and concept should be tested at other companies and the generalizability analyzed. Different factors, such as the demanding service level requirements and regulatory hurdles that prevent companies from making quick changes to capacity, are the reason why this problem is especially relevant within this industry. The factors required to increase the importance of holistic strategic warehouse capacity planning should also be analyzed within other industries. Besides, the deterministic simulation model has limitations when considering the dynamic nature of the production system or when considering variations in supply quantity. While this limitation is accepted for the strategic planning horizon, it would be more critical for a shorter planning horizon.
The outcome shows that building such a capability not only improves warehouse capacity planning, but can also support other tasks and projects in supply chain management because of the increased transparency throughout logistics operations. This is in accordance with other authors who mention that the benefits for DSSs in the supply chain context include enhanced understanding and the possibility of conducting experiments and what-if analyses [ ]. With the new process at hand, the case study company can also use it for projects related to logistics. For example, how many pallets of a specific kind of material are, on average, at a specific plant? At which plants are these materials stored? What capacity is affected if the production of specific product families is relocated from one plant to another? These kinds of question have led in the past to an ad hoc evaluation that consumes time and resources. With an integrated process, projects can more effectively evaluate such questions early in the process and discover opportunities that have not been encountered before. Even so, the general low importance of supply chain management within pharmaceutical companies will remain a challenge for logistics managers. Generally, the supply chain benefits from information sharing [ ]. Further, as a result of their analysis, Schwarz and Zhao’s finding is that even when information transparency is increased in the pharmaceutical industry, the inventories are still comparatively high and the pharmaceutical manufacturers do not leverage new information [ ]. This finding is also supported by an examination of performance measures used in the industry. The highest priority is still reliability, not inventory costs. Thus, the organization is often unwilling to change processes and data structures based on logistics preferences because many of these processes are audited by regulators, and there is always a risk involved when changing from the approved status quo. Hence, even when increasing information transparency, it is of great importance that new information is leveraged. Mastering this challenge in the light of future trends will be an important task for the future supply chain manager within this industry. Pharmaceutical companies that manage to use part of their innovative strength for the improvement of their supply chain practices and openly consider alternative processes in order to establish best practices, as happened with the case study company, will become even more important in the future for this industry.