Introduction
An increasing number of the newly discovered drug compounds in the pipelines of pharmaceutical companies exhibit poor water solubility. The drug solubility and dissolution rate can be improved by different approaches such as reduction in drug particle size which increases available surface area for dissolution [ , , , ], as per the Noyes-Whitney equation [ ]; formation of amorphous form of the drug [ , ]; solubilization in surfactant systems [ ]; and use of pro-drug approach such as salt forms of drugs which usually have higher solubility in water. Among these approaches, formulating the poorly water-soluble drugs in the form of nanosized or colloidal particles is quite common, which is usually carried out by wet stirred media milling. While wet stirred media milling is a robust, solvent-free, scalable, and industrially well-established process that can be used to produce concentrated nanosuspensions of a multitude of poorly water-soluble drugs [ , , ], it involves high energy consumption and long processing time, and wear of milling media may cause severe contamination of the drug suspensions unless media size and process intensity are properly chosen [ ]. Hence, development of simpler, cheaper, and less energy intensive processes for production of drug nanoparticles is highly desirable.
A simple, energy-conserving method for the preparation of drug nanosuspensions is melt emulsification (ME) [ , , , , ]. While only applicable to drugs with melting points below the boiling point of water, it is an attractive process due to its simplicity. In this process, an aqueous suspension of drug particles is heated to temperatures above the melting point of the drug to form an oil-in-water (o/w) emulsion owing to the immiscibility of the molten drug with water. This hot emulsion is exposed to some mechanical disturbance such as sonication with an ultrasonic probe [ ], high pressure homogenization [ ], magnetic stirring [ ], etc. that leads to droplet breakup. Droplet sizes in the nanometer range can be obtained provided the applied energy is intense. Subsequent cooling of the emulsion leads to solidification–recrystallization of the drug droplets to nanoparticles that are much smaller than those in the as-received drug powder, thus leading to a drastic increase in the surface area of the drug.
In pharmaceutical literature, the ME process has been well-described and used to produce nanosuspensions of various drugs with low melting point such as fenofibrate (FNB) [ , ] and ibuprofen [ ]. Kockbeck et al. [ ] prepared 160–270 nm ibuprofen particles using various stabilizers. Interestingly, they reported the particle size immediately after the suspension preparation, but no information was provided about potential size increase upon storage of the suspensions, which characterizes the physical stability. Similarly, Huang et al. [ ] prepared colloidal FNB suspensions with particles in the size range of 1–3 μm using Pluronic F127 as the stabilizer. They did not report the storage stability of the suspensions either. Li et al. [ ] prepared FNB suspensions with a median size of 300 nm using a mixture of polymeric surfactant, Poloxamer 188 (PF68), and polyvinyl pyrolidone (PVP K30), and they did not discuss the storage stability of the suspensions. In a recent study by Knieke et al. [ ], FNB suspensions with loadings up to 30 % ( w / w ) were produced by ME process using sonication via an ultrasonic probe, and they had median sizes down to 150 nm. Knieke et al. [ ] investigated the effects of various stabilizers such as non-ionic surfactants, neutral polymers, polymeric surfactants, and their combinations on the as-prepared size of the suspensions, but they did not report the storage stability of the resultant suspensions. In summary, all of the above-mentioned studies demonstrated the feasibility of producing nanoparticles or colloidal particles of poorly water-soluble drugs in a suspension form; however, none of these studies has investigated the physical stability of the suspensions produced by the ME process over a period of time during the storage. During the storage, if drug nanoparticles exhibit size increase significantly, their dissolution enhancement potential might be negatively affected.
As mentioned above, drug nanoparticles can exhibit size increase via aggregation and Ostwald ripening [ , , ]. Although these mechanisms can be suppressed and their impact can be mitigated by proper choice of a stabilizer system [ , , , ], an alternative strategy to ensure the long-term stability of the drug nanoparticles has been to dry the suspensions, which can be achieved via spray drying [ , ], fluidized bed drying [ ], freeze drying [ ], and as has been shown recently, wet casting into polymer films followed by oven drying [ , ]. Interestingly, drug nanoparticles can also aggregate during drying, and the advantages of the large surface area of the colloidal particles may be lost [ , ]. This issue can be overcome by controlling the formulation and drying process conditions in such a way that when these dried forms are dispersed in physiologically relevant fluids, the drug nanoparticles redisperse back to their original size. For example, drug nanoparticles produced by wet media milling [ , ] and liquid antisolvent precipitation [ ] were incorporated into polymeric films via casting–drying, which allowed for fast recovery and dissolution of the drug nanoparticles. However, to the authors’ best knowledge, the integration of drug nanoparticles produced by the ME process into polymeric films has not been investigated previously.
The aim of this study is to investigate the short-term physical stability of the FNB suspensions prepared via melt emulsification (ME) and enhance the storage stability and drug dissolution by incorporating the FNB particles into hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC)-based films. To achieve this objective, several FNB suspensions were prepared via ME with/without PF68 as stabilizer and sonication during the cooling step. The resulting FNB suspensions, along with a suspension of as-received FNB, were mixed with HPMC–glycerin film solution to prepare film precursor suspensions, which were then casted and dried into films in an oven. The storage stability of the suspensions was studied over a week, and impact of sonication was studied by measuring the particle size distribution (PSD) via laser diffraction. The films were redispersed in water under mixing, and PSD of the recovered FNB particles was measured. In addition, FNB dissolution in a USP IV apparatus was studied. These characterization test results were analyzed to determine the impact of the use of PF68 as stabilizer and the sonication during the cooling step as well as the feasibility of the film format in ensuring immediate drug release.
Materials and Methods
Materials
FNB, purchased from Jai Radhe Sales (Ahmedabad, India), was used as a model poorly water-soluble drug in this study because it has an aqueous solubility of 0.8 mg/L at room temperature [ ] and a melting point of 78–81 °C, below the boiling point of water, thus can be emulsified in water. To stabilize the droplets formed during the melt emulsification as well as the solid particles formed upon solidification, a polymeric surfactant, Pluronic F68 (PF68), purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) was used. The polymeric film solution was prepared using hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose (HPMC E15 LV) as film-former and glycerin as plasticizer, which were purchased from Dow Chemical (Midland, USA) and Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA), respectively.
Preparation of FNB Suspensions via Melt Emulsification
The steps involved during the melt emulsification (ME) of FNB are illustrated in Fig. 1 . Except in run 1 that was carried out without ME processing as a control (Table 1 ), all films were prepared using the ME-processed FNB suspensions (runs 2–4). In run 1, FNB was dispersed for 30 min in 50 g deionized water kept in 80-mL beaker using a magnetic stirrer running at 400 rpm, and this pre-suspension was directly mixed with the film-forming solution without ME treatment. Keeping other conditions the same, FNB was dispersed in 50 g deionized water without PF68 in run 2, whereas PF68 was dissolved in 50 g deionized water in runs 3 and 4, and FNB was then dispersed in the aqueous solution of 0.5 % PF68 ( w / w , with respect to water). In all these pre-suspensions, FNB concentration was 1 % w / w with respect to water. About 0.5 % PF68 was used based on the study by Knieke et al. [ ], who screened various polymers and surfactants and showed that PF68 produced finest suspensions of FNB by ME process and increase in concentration of PF68 beyond 0.5 % did not help in further reduction of particle size; however, they did not study storage stability of these suspensions. Fig. 1 Schematic of the experimental set-up for the melt emulsification (ME) process Table 1 Formulation of the suspensions and the films as well as their drug (FNB) content Run no. Composition of suspensions (%) a ME Processing Composition of films (%) c Mean drug content (%) with RSD (%) FNB PF68 FNB PF68 HPMC Glycerin 1 1 0 None 4.72 0 71.46 23.82 3.85 (± 20.5) 2 1 0 With sonication b 4.72 0 71.46 23.82 3.40 (± 10.9) 3 1 0.5 Without sonication b 4.59 2.29 69.84 23.28 4.71 (± 3.77) 4 1 0.5 With sonication b 4.59 2.29 69.84 23.28 5.03 (± 1.47) a Refers to theoretical weight percentage of FNB and PF68 with respect to the weight of water in ME suspensions b Refers to the cooling step of the ME process c Refers to theoretical weight percentage of FNB, PF68, HPMC, and glycerin with respect to the weight of dry films
FNB pre-suspensions prepared in runs 2–4 were gently mixed using a magnetic stirrer and simultaneously heated to 90–95 °C to ensure complete melting of FNB after which emulsification was carried out under sonication provided by an ultrasonic probe (Vibra Cell VCX 750, Sonics & Materials, Inc., Newtown, CT) for 5 min at 100 % intensity with a 10 s:1 s pulse ratio (i.e., a 10-s pulse on, followed by a 1-s pulse off). Sonication conditions for emulsification were chosen based on the study by Knieke et al. [ ]. The ultrasonic probe was inserted into the beaker containing FNB melt in water, which was placed on top of the hot plate magnetic stirrer. During the emulsification step, the temperature was maintained at 85 °C to avoid premature solidification of the melt. The hot oil-in-water (o/w) emulsion was then rapidly cooled in a thermostatic saline bath to −3.0 °C (NESLAB TRE 10 Digital One, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Newington, NH).
The emulsion prepared in run 3 was cooled for 10 min with gentle stirring with a metal rod without any sonication. The emulsion produced in runs 2 and 4 was cooled for 10 min in the presence of sonication by placing an ultrasonic probe (Omni Sonic Ruptor 250, Omni, Int’l, Kennesaw, GA) which operated at 50 % intensity with a 1.8 s: 0.2 s pulse ratio. The FNB droplets solidified during the cooling step, resulting in the formation of solid FNB particles in suspension form. Then, particle size of these suspensions was measured; a small portion was kept aside to measure the storage stability of the suspensions at room temperature, and the rest was used to make drug-laden polymeric films (see below). Since sonication was always present during the emulsification step of the ME process, i.e., runs 2–4, “with/without sonication” throughout the rest of this paper refers to the sonication applied during the cooling step of the ME process, unless otherwise indicated for clarity.
Preparation of Polymeric Films
Figure 2 shows a schematic of the film casting–drying process used for incorporating the FNB suspension without ME treatment (run 1) and FNB suspensions prepared via ME process (runs 2–4) into polymeric films. A film-former solution containing 15 % HPMC E15 LV ( w/w , with respect to solution) and 5 % glycerin ( w/w , with respect to solution) was prepared in a 250-mL glass beaker using a hot plate magnetic stirrer (same as that used during the ME process) running at 400 rpm. Glycerin was dissolved in deionized water (80 g) at 80 °C. HPMC was then added until well dispersed, and the temperature was decreased to room temperature for complete dissolution. Mixing continued until a transparent yellowish solution was obtained, and the solution was then let to rest overnight until bubbles disappeared. The above composition of the film solution was chosen based on prior work done by our group [ , , , ] to produce fast-disintegrating films with acceptable visual attributes and sufficient mechanical strength. Fig. 2 Process flow diagram for the integration of the FNB suspensions prepared by the ME process into films
The HPMC–glycerin solution was kept ready at room temperature 1 day before FNB suspensions were prepared. The HPMC–glycerin solution (50 g) was added to the FNB suspension produced by the ME process (50 g) in runs 2–4 approximately 30 min after their preparation and mixed for 5 h at ∼300 rpm using a dual-impeller mixer (McMaster, Catalog no. 3471 K5, Los Angeles, CA, USA) attached to a motor (IKA RW16 Basic Overhead Stirrer). In run 1, the polymer solution was added to the FNB pre-suspension, immediately after mixing FNB with water, and rest of the mixing and film casting process was kept the same as that used for runs 2–4. After 5-h mixing, the mixture was left to rest for 12 h until bubbles disappeared. Then, the suspensions were cast onto a stainless steel plate using an Elcometer 3700 Doctor Blade (Elcometer, USA). The wet film thickness was set to 1 mm by adjusting the Doctor Blade aperture. The wet films were dried overnight in an oven (Gallenkamp 300 Plus Series, UK) at 40 °C. The actual drug loading in dried films was measured, and the films were used for redispersion and dissolution testing.
Characterization
Drug Content in the Films
Six circular discs with an area of 5.07 cm 2 (2.54-cm diameter) were punched from the films produced in runs 1–4. Each circular disc was dissolved in 100-mL aqueous solution of 18.7-mM sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), which ensures full drug dissolution. An aliquot of 2 mL from these samples was used for absorbance measurement of dissolved FNB at a wavelength of 290 nm by Ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopy (Evolution 300, Thermo Scientific; Santa Clara, CA, USA). Each circular disc was weighed before dissolving in SDS, and the percentage drug was calculated. The mean drug content with relative standard deviation (RSD) was reported for n = 6 samples and are presented in Table 1 .
Redispersion of Films
A circular disc of the film with 2.54-cm diameter was dispersed in a 25-mL beaker containing 10 mL deionized water and stirred with a magnetic stirrer at a speed of ∼475 rpm for 5 min. An aliquot of the sample was taken from the beaker while the suspension was being stirred and particle size was measured via laser diffraction (see below). The use of SDS was avoided to minimize drug dissolution in the redispersion test. As solubility of FNB in water is 0.8 mg/L, only 0.2 % FNB in the film could dissolve in water and most FNB was dispersed as particles. The sizes of the redispersed particles were compared with those in the ME-prepared suspensions (right after the cooling step) and the film precursor suspensions.
Drug Crystallinity
Diffraction patterns of PF68, as-received FNB particles, physical mixture of PF68 and FNB, and the FNB–PF68 suspension (run 4) after oven drying were obtained using the Philips X’Pert PW3040 X-ray diffractometer at operating conditions of 40 mA and 45 kV. FNB suspension prepared in run 4 was poured into a Petri dish and dried overnight in an oven at 40 °C, and this dried suspension was crushed via mortar-pestle and the resulting powder was used for X-ray diffraction analysis. Physical mixture of FNB and PF68 was also prepared by mixing the two powders in the FNB: PF68 mass ratio of 2:1 in a glass vial and shaking it manually for 5 min. Cu Ka radiation with a wavelength λ of 0.15406 nm was used. The X-ray patterns were recorded in the range 5° ≤ 2 h ≤ 40° with a step width of 0.02° and a counting time of 1.0 s per step.
Particle Size and Morphology
PSDs of the FNB suspensions prepared via ME processing (runs 2–4), the pre-suspension of the as-received FNB particles (run 1), the film precursor suspensions, and the suspension samples obtained during the redispersion tests were measured by laser diffraction using Beckman Coulter LS 13320 (Coulter Beckman, Inc.; Brea, CA, USA). A few drops of the suspensions were added to the measurement cell of LS 13320, and the particle size was measured when polarization intensity diffraction scattering (PIDS) reached 40 %. Particle size was computed by the software using Mie scattering theory with a dispersant refractive index of 1.33, and the particle refractive index of 1.546 for FNB. The particle size of runs 2–4 suspensions was measured immediately after the cooling step in the ME process (0 min) and later after 10, 20, 30, 60, 120 min, 1 day, and 1 week to monitor their storage stability at room temperature. The particle size of the film precursor suspensions was measured at the end of 5-h mixing of the polymer solution with the FNB suspensions.
Morphological evaluation of the FNB particles prepared with PF68 and sonication during cooling (run 4) was conducted by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, LEO 1530 SVMP, Carl Zeiss; Peabody, MA, USA). The SEM sample was prepared by diluting the suspension in deionized water and placing a drop of this dilution onto silicon chip placed on top of a carbon tape. The drop was dried in a desiccator, coated with carbon, and used for SEM imaging.
Drug Dissolution from the Films
FNB dissolution from circular film samples with 1.59-cm diameter (1.98 cm 2 ) and an average thickness of ∼70 μm, measured with a digital micrometer (Mitutoyo, Japan), was performed using a USP type IV apparatus (CE7 smart , Sotax; Allschwil, Switzerland) with cells of an internal diameter of 22.6 mm, in accordance with the method developed by Sievens-Figueroa et al. [ ]. The conical part at the bottom of each cell was filled with 3.5 g of 1 mm glass beads, and the film sample was placed horizontally on top of these beads and secured in place by adding 3 g more beads on top of the film. Glass microfiber filters (0.2 μm, GF/D grade) were used in the filter-head for each experiment. As dissolution medium, 600 mL of 18.7 mM SDS solution was used at 37 ± 0.5 °C. The flow rate in each cell was set to 16 mL/min. An integrated Thermo Evolution UV spectrophotometer was used to automatically measure the FNB concentration using a previously established calibration curve. The average–standard deviation for FNB release from six film samples was reported.
Results and Discussion
Short-Term Physical Stability of the FNB Suspensions Prepared via ME Process
As shown in Fig. 1 , FNB was melted in water with/without PF68 as the stabilizer, and this hot mixture was broken into smaller droplets with an ultrasonic probe, leading to o/w emulsion of FNB in water, followed by cooling to obtain the final FNB suspension. In run 2, FNB suspension was prepared without PF68 (Table 1 ) using sonication during the cooling step. The particle size of the resulting suspension was measured immediately after cooling: D 50 and D 90 values were 8.57 and 18.26 μm, respectively. Since FNB emulsions were prepared without using an emulsifier, the molten droplets of FNB coalesced. Even though sonication helped to mechanically separate molten FNB droplets, they coalesced because there is no stabilizer to adsorb onto the molten FNB droplets to prevent coalescence. During the cooling step again sonication helps to mechanically separate the solidified FNB particles, but in the absence of a stabilizer severe aggregation (physical instability) occurred as shown by high D 50 and D 90 values.
In runs 3 and 4, PF68 was used as a polymeric surfactant for proper emulsification and reduction of particle aggregation in the absence/presence of sonication during the cooling step, respectively. Note that for both runs, sonication was used to prepare the melt emulsion, but not during the cooling step for run 3, where the emulsion was cooled down by gentle stirring with a metal rod. Figure 3a, b show the evolution of characteristic particle sizes D 10 , D 50 (median size), and D 90 during the storage of the respective suspensions over 120 min at room temperature (∼24 °C). The use of PF68 ensured that fine colloidal FNB particles with sizes less than 300 nm were formed right after ME treatment–cooling (0 min), even without sonication during the cooling step (run 3, Fig. 3a ). However, after 10 min of ME preparation, the FNB particle size started increasing, most relative increase occurred within 20 min, and little change occurred after 1 h, suggesting fast size increase even in the presence of PF68. This is a significant finding as most pharmaceutical literature [ , , , ] on ME process did not report the storage stability of the resulting suspensions. Immediately after the cooling step, it is possible that the drug particles were still amorphous due to rapid cooling and FNB’s high relative glass-forming ability when super cooled from the molten state [ ]. This so-called super cooled “liquid” nature of the particles rendered them sticky, causing them to coalesce with other particles or to adhere to other particles and the beaker walls [ ], which explain the size increase with time. In the absence of detailed microstructural characterization of the particle samples taken at different time points, it is hard to suggest when and how such amorphous–crystalline transition occurs. It is speculated that both supercooled droplets and recrystallized particles experience coalescence-size growth as well as aggregation as a result of Brownian collision during the storage. Fig. 3 Particle size statistics of the FNB suspensions with PF68 prepared by the ME process: a without sonication during the cooling step (run 3) and b with the use of sonication during the cooling step (run 4). The particle sizes were measured right after the final cooling step of the ME process, i.e., 0 min, and then the stability of this suspension at room temperature was monitored at 10, 20, 30, 60, and 120 min
Sonication with an ultrasonic probe was employed as a treatment during the cooling step in run 4. Figure 3b shows that particles produced in the presence of sonication during cooling exhibited enhanced storage stability over the course of 120 min. The particle size was also measured after 1 week and the sonicated sample (run 4) had a median particle size of 1.03 μm, whereas the gentle-stirred sample without sonication during cooling grew to a median size of 14 μm (data not shown). Interestingly, the SEM micrograph in Fig. 4 shows mostly <600 nm primary particles produced in the presence of sonication during cooling, which in view of the data in Fig. 3b suggests that limited or smaller extent of particle aggregation/coalescence occurred when sonication was used during cooling (run 4). During sonication, due to the propagation of ultrasound through water, high and low pressure cycles are created. During the high pressure cycle cavities collapse creating shock waves and liquid jet streams. This phenomenon, termed as cavitation, produces transient high local pressures [ , ], which allows for deagglomerating the agglomerates [ ] or aggregates [ ]. As the clusters break down and fresh surfaces are exposed, PF68 can adsorb to the fresh surfaces and prevent the reaggregation of the primary particles. Fig. 4 SEM image of the FNB particles with PF68 produced by the ME process. SEM stubs were prepared 30 min after the cooling step with sonication during the cooling (run 4)
Figure 3 also shows that the initial (0 min, right after cooling) particles formed were larger when sonication was present (run 4) than its absence (run 3) during the cooling. During the cooling of the hot emulsion, the intense agitation upon sonication treatment (run 4) led to a higher collision frequency than the gentle rod stirring (run 3), which in turn could have led to faster coalescence of the molten particles until the particles solidified and/or recrystallized as well as some PF68 adsorption took place. It was also observed that when sonication was applied during cooling, the temperature after 10 min cooling was 30 °C, whereas the temperature of run 3 after 10 min cooling with gentle stirring was 1 °C. These measurements suggest that the slower cooling rate in run 4 could have led to a delay in rapid solidification/recrystallization of FNB molten droplets, leading to longer interaction of relatively soft, sticky particles, and in turn formation of coarser particles during cooling. However, following solidification/recrystallization, further aggregation of these initially coarser run 4 particles was suppressed perhaps due to facilitated adsorption of PF68 onto solidified FNB particles when sonication was present. On the other hand, as will be seen from dissolution test results, the impact of sonication on drug dissolution from the films is not significant provided PF68 is used in the ME process.
Drug Particle Loaded Polymer Films
To preserve the large surface area of the colloidal FNB particles prepared via the ME process and to minimize issues encountered during the storage of the FNB suspensions, the suspensions must be dried, which not only enhances long-term stability, but also yields a solid-dosage form that is convenient and patient-friendly. In this study, the FNB pre-suspension without ME treatment (run 1) and FNB suspensions prepared via ME process (runs 2–4) were mixed with the HPMC–glycerin film-forming solution to prepare film precursor suspensions, which were then casted–dried into polymeric films using the process illustrated in Fig. 2 . All films were cast with a wet film thickness of 1000 μm; after drying, the dry film thickness was about 65–70 μm. The actual drug loading in the films containing as-received, coarse FNB particles (run 1), and ME-processed FNB particles without PF68 (run 2) was low as compared with the estimated drug loadings. The films prepared in runs 1 and 2 led to unacceptably large RSD (>6 %, see Table 1 ). The particle sizes of the as-received FNB particles (run 1) were D 50 = 68.5 and D 90 = 550 μm (Fig. 5a ), and those of the precursor suspension prepared from run 2 suspension in the absence of PF68 (Fig. 5b ) were D 50 = 4.57 and D 90 = 17.2 μm. In the absence of PF68, the FNB particles aggregated severely and formed an inhomogeneous suspension during the mixing step in the film formation process. This led to an uneven distribution of the drug in the film resulting in high RSD. On the other hand, the films prepared from FNB suspensions with PF68 in runs 3 and 4 had better content uniformity as PF68 improved mixing performance and homogenous distribution of FNB particles in the viscous polymer solution. The drug content uniformity of run 4 films was better than run 3 films because run 4 precursor suspension had smaller FNB particles than run 3 precursor suspension (Fig. 5d vs. c). The FNB particles in run 3 grew from D 50 = 0.37 μm (0 min) to D 50 = 10.46 μm in the precursor suspension (Fig. 5c ), which indicates severe physical instability (see also Fig. 3a ) for the run 3 suspension. Due to the presence and potential settling of coarse aggregates, the run 3 precursor suspension was expected to be more inhomogeneous and its drying led to films with higher RSD as compared to films prepared from run 4 precursor suspension. On the other hand, higher drug loadings were obtained in runs 3 and 4 films than the estimated drug loadings, which may be explained by UV measurement errors due to the low drug loading in the films and/or drug inhomogeneity in the precursor suspensions. Fig. 5 Particle sizes of the suspension of the as-received FNB (run 1) or the ME suspensions formed immediately after the cooling step (runs 2–4, 0 min), particle sizes of the film precursor suspensions, and particles sizes of the FNB after redispersion from the respective films: a Run 1 (as-received FNB, no ME), b run 2 (FNB ME-processed with sonication), c run 3 (FNB–PF68 ME-processed without sonication), and d run 4 (FNB–PF68 ME-processed with sonication)
Recovery of FNB Particles during Film Redispersion in Water
Recovery of drug nanoparticles from solid dosage forms during their redispersion in aqueous fluids could have significant implications in terms of the dissolution of poorly water-soluble drugs; hence, redispersion tests serve as a discriminatory tool to identify feasible formulations which could release drug nanoparticles fast from powders to be filled into sachets, capsules, etc. [ , , ] and films [ , ].
The coarse, as-received FNB particles used in the preparation of the films (run 1), remained large throughout the entire film formation process, while D 90 decreased after mixing the FNB pre-suspension (suspension of the as-received FNB powder) with HPMC–glycerin film-forming solution due to the deaggregation of the FNB aggregates in the pre-suspension (Fig. 5a ). The film precursor suspensions were kept undisturbed for ∼12 h after mixing to reduce the foam in the sample before casting into films. During this period, larger particles can settle down which leads to inhomogeneity of sample during casting. The smaller D 90 of the particles emanating from the film may be explained by the deaggregation of the FNB aggregates present in the as-received powder during the film precursor preparation. Run 2 had aggregated particles in the absence of PF68, despite the presence of sonication during cooling (Fig. 5b ). The particle size of this suspension reduced slightly after mixing with the film precursor solution because during the mixing step, HPMC adsorbs on the surfaces of the ME-processed FNB particles and provides steric stabilization [ ]. The particle size after redispersion of the films (Fig. 5b ) was found to be similar to that of the film precursor suspension.
The particle size statistics of run 3 film precursor suspension were D 50 = 10.5 and D 90 = 28.1 μm (Fig. 5c ). Figure 3a has already suggested that the FNB suspension produced without sonication during cooling (run 3) exhibited size increase within 10 min. The HPMC–glycerin solution was added to the FNB suspension 30 min after cooling. The particle size of the FNB suspension had already increased in 30 min to D 50 of 7.93 and D 50 of 13.71 μm in 60 min, as shown in Fig. 3a . Mixing with polymer solution did not disperse these aggregates. Since the film precursor suspension contained aggregates of FNB, the film formed from run 3 suspension redispersed into large aggregates (Fig. 5c ).
The films prepared from FNB suspension produced in the presence of sonication during cooling and PF68 (run 4) redispersed completely into colloidal particles (Fig. 5d ) as the fine colloidal sizes after the ME process were preserved in the precursor suspension and after film redispersion. It is known from Fig. 3b that the FNB suspension produced with the use of sonication during cooling was stable up to 120 min and the particle size remained the same up to 1 week. Therefore, during mixing of the ME suspension with film precursor solution, the FNB particles remained stable and also redispersed completely from the films unlike the suspensions prepared without sonication during cooling. Overall, these results suggest that the presence of PF68 and sonication during the cooling step of the ME process allows for the production of fine colloidal drug particles, which can be effectively recovered from the films. The presence of large concentration of HPMC enables effective encapsulation of the relatively hydrophobic FNB particles in a hydrophilic film matrix, which helps the redispersion of the FNB nanoparticles.
Drug Crystallinity
Figure 6 shows the X-ray diffraction patterns of as-received FNB powder, PF68 powder, a physical mixture of PF68 and FNB powders, and dried ME suspension prepared in run 4. While the same peak locations were observed for the dried suspension (run 4) sample and the as-received FNB, the peaks were shorter in the former. Since the peak reduction in the intensities is also notable in the physical mixture, the peak reduction can be attributed to the surface coverage of FNB particles by PF68 [ ] and smaller size of FNB particles in the dried ME suspension. Note that XRD cannot detect minor amount of amorphous content due to indirect inference, crystal orientation effects, and instrument-related intensity variations [ ]. Hence, we inferred from the XRD results that the crystalline material was present, and there were no observations of crystalline form change. Fig. 6 X-ray diffractograms of PF68, as-received FNB, physical mixture of PF68 and as-received FNB, and oven-dried FNB suspension prepared by ME with PF68 and with sonication during the cooling step (run 4)
Drug Dissolution from the Films
The dissolution profiles of FNB particles from runs 1–4 films and as-received FNB particles are depicted in Fig. 7 . The as-received FNB particles dissolved very slowly due to their larger sizes (D 50 = 68 μm) and the inherent poor water-solubility of FNB (0.8 mg/L) as a Biopharmaceutical Classification System (BCS) Class II drug. Films prepared from the as-received FNB particles without the ME treatment also exhibited slow drug dissolution similar to the as-received FNB particles in powder form for the same reason. This indicates that incorporating the FNB particles into films without any particle engineering treatment like ME processing did not improve the dissolution rate of FNB. On the other hand, the films with FNB particles prepared by the ME process even without PF68 as the stabilizer (run 2) had a significantly faster dissolution: about 80 % of FNB dissolved in 32 min. This shows the superior drug release capability imparted by the thin polymeric films, which was demonstrated recently for BCS Class II particles processed via wet media milling [ , ] and liquid anti-solvent precipitation [ ]. However, run 2 films showed more erratic dissolution behavior perhaps owing to their poor content uniformity (Table 1 ) and poor water-redispersibility (refer to previous section), as compared with run 4 films. The redispersion of run 2 films showed coarse aggregates (Fig. 5b ) in water, but these particle sizes were smaller than the as-received FNB particles, which explain the faster dissolution from run 2 films as compared with run 1 films. In addition, the SDS buffer used in the dissolution medium as opposed to water used in the redispersion test helped further wettability, deaggregation of the existing aggregates in run 2 films and improved solubility due to SDS micelles, thus resulting in enhanced dissolution. Fig. 7 Dissolution profiles of FNB from the as-received FNB particles and the dried films prepared via run 1 (as-received FNB, no ME), run 2 (FNB ME-processed with sonication), run 3 (FNB–PF68 ME-processed without sonication), and run 4 (FNB–PF68 ME-processed with sonication)
The dissolution rate of FNB from the films prepared with sonication (run 4) and without sonication (run 3) is observed to be similar (Fig. 7 ) even though run 3 films exhibited poor redispersibility and recovery of FNB colloidal particles in water as compared with run 4 films. Again, this can be explained by the differences between the redispersion and dissolution tests. The dissolution test had 18.7 mM SDS in the dissolution medium, whereas deionized water was used in the redispersion test. SDS present in the dissolution medium reduces surface tension and enhances the wettability of the films and the clusters formed during the erosion of the films in the dissolution test. In addition, SDS forms micelles and solubilizes the FNB particles [ ]. This solubilization along with the enhanced deaggregation of the drug clusters increases the dissolution rate of the FNB particles from the films. The presence of SDS needed to ensure sink conditions in the dissolution test renders the dissolution test to have a lower discriminating power for relatively fast-dissolving film formulations (runs 3 and 4). The coarse aggregates observed in the water-dispersed sample of run 3 (Fig. 5c ) could have easily dispersed and dissolved by SDS in the dissolution test, which is in agreement with a previous study by Bhakay et al. [ ], where the redispersion–dissolution tests on griseofulvin-loaded dried composite powders exhibited a similar behavior. Finally, it is important to mention that the positive dissolution impact of PF68 present in the formulation and SDS in the dissolution medium may not necessarily translate to significant bioavailability enhancement. This aspect can only be assessed by animal testing and clinical studies, which are beyond the scope of this current study.
Conclusion and Outlook
The preparation of FNB suspensions by melt emulsification in the presence of PF68 using sonication during the cooling step of ME process led to stable suspensions, whose casting–drying with HPMC–glycerin led to fast-dissolving films with enhanced FNB dissolution. The use of sonication during cooling in the ME process extended the storage stability of FNB suspensions, whereas FNB suspensions produced without sonication during cooling severely aggregated within 20 min. The storage stability of the FNB nanoparticles was further improved by incorporating them into films. The redispersion of the films in water led to effective recovery of fine colloidal FNB particles only when PF68 and sonication during cooling in the ME process were used. Acceptable content uniformity was obtained from films with PF68, whose presence led to the fastest FNB dissolution from the films. The film format with the ME-processed particles allowed for significant improvement of the drug dissolution, while mitigating the potential negative impact of the aggregates in the suspensions. Overall, it is shown that polymeric films can be used as a viable platform to achieve long-term stability of the nanosuspensions of poorly soluble drugs prepared via ME process with the ultimate goal of enhancing the drug dissolution rate and potentially the bioavailability of the poorly water-soluble drugs especially those that belong to BCS Class II. Future studies will focus on formulation–process optimization, process scale-up, impact of various stabilizers besides PF68, and long-term stability of the suspensions as well as the films.