Introduction
When abnormally high influx of reactive oxygen species (ROS) exceeds normal cellular antioxidant capacity, it is collectively termed “oxidative stress”. Oxidative stress causes many pathological processes including inflammation, cellular dysfunction, tissue damage, and organ fibrosis [ , , ]. These toxic effects, which are amplified by pathological events including neutrophil activation, hyperoxia, metabolism of redox-active drugs, radiation exposure, and ischemia/reperfusion, include membrane damage resulting from lipid peroxidation, as well as attack by ROS on proteins and nucleic acids [ , , ]. To cure ROS-mediated injuries and diseases, antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (SOD) can be used as a therapeutic agent to cure various diseases mediated by ROS. However, the major drawback of systemic administration of SOD and other antioxidant enzymes is their ultrashort elimination half-life and their low affinity to cell membranes ( t 1/2α is approximately 6 min) [ ].
Chemical modification of SOD is proven to be promising in controlling its disposition characteristics in the body thus improving its pharmacological activity [ , , ]. In our previous study, after modification with mucopolysaccharide, SOD has lowered immunogenicity, increased anti-inflammatory activity, and enhanced stabilities toward acid, alkali, heat, and trypsin [ , ]. It is known that the damage induced by ROS is characterized by site-specific events. Therefore, if antioxidant enzymes are to be used for the treatment, they should be located in close proximity to the site of inflammation. Cationization of proteins has been suggested as a tool to increase their residence time in target organs. The ability of cationized proteins to adhere to negatively charged tissues poses an interesting potential in drug targeting delivery [ , ]. Cationization of SOD proteins has been shown to improve their cellular uptake via nonspecific electrostatic interactions with the negative charge of the cell surface [ , ]. Ishimoto et al. had reported that direct cationization of SOD greatly enhanced its cellular uptake and subsequently improved its inhibitory effect on superoxide anion release from macrophages [ ]. Chitosan is a positively charged polysaccharide composed of 2-amino-2-deoxy-(1-4)- d -glucopyranose, which has reactive amino and hydroxyl groups. Chitosan has attracted much attention as a biomedical material, owing to its unique biological activities, such as antitumor, antibacterial, and immunostimulatory activities. Recently, the antioxidant activity and radioprotective effect of chitosan are also interestingly notified [ , , ]. Therefore, it is anticipated that the conjugate of chitosan and SOD could provide improved properties, such as long half-life, low immunogenicity, increased stability, and enhanced anti-inflammatory activity.
In our laboratory, Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD) had been chemically modified with polycation mucopolysaccharide, N , N , N -trimethyl chitosan chloride (TMC) [ ]. We hypothesized that the attachment of antioxidant enzymes to the specific site of inflammation would increase the efficacy of inflammation therapy. In our previous study, TMC-SOD is shown to have high affinity to some cells, such as macrophages with negatively charged surface. In addition, such chemical modification of SOD, especially cationization, greatly enhanced SOD’s intracellular delivery [ ]. Furthermore, TMC-SOD exhibited excellent inhibitory effects on superoxide anion release from macrophages and, as a consequence, produced a significant protective effect against ROS-mediated injury and the effects surpassed those of native SOD and heparin-SOD conjugate [ ]. The effects of TMC-SOD on inflammatory cytokine expression in vitro were also evaluated in our earlier study. It showed that TMC-SOD could significantly lower transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) and interleukine-1β (IL-1β) expressed by irradiated 3T3 fibroblasts [ ].
In this study, we studied pharmacokinetics of TMC-SOD with intravenously administered mice. We speculated that after modification (TMC-SOD), the concentrations of TMC-SOD in plasma would be maintained for a longer period than that of unmodified enzyme (SOD) and result in more efficient exposure to the target sites. The secondary structure and cell targeting association of TMC-SOD derivatives were also investigated.
Materials and Methods
Chemicals
Cu,Zn-SOD (Yanghe Biotechnological Co. Ltd., China), chitosan (3 kD, Haidebei Biochemical Co. Ltd., China), high specific activity ( 126 I content normally < 0.005 %), and carrier-free protein iodination Na 125 I (100 mCi/mL in 0.01 M NaOH solution, pH 7–11) were purchased from Amersham Biosciences Limited (Amersham, UK), Iodogen (1,3,4,6-tetrachloro-3a,6a-diphenylglucoluril) iodination reagent was purchased from Pierce (Rockford, IL, USA), and other chemicals and reagents were of analytical grade.
Animals
Pathogen-free 6- to 8-week-old male Kunming mice, weighing 20–22 g, were provided by Experimental Animal Center of Qufu Normal University. The animals were housed in animal facilities accredited by the Shandong Council on Animal Care and maintained in a specific pathogen-free environment that was temperature-controlled (23 ± 2 °C) and humidity-controlled (60 ± 10 %), under a 12-h light-dark cycle. The experimental design and procedures were approved by the Institutional Ethical Committee for Animal Care and Use of Qufu Normal University, which is in accordance with the strict guiding principles of the National Institution of Health for Experimental Care and Use of Animals in People’s Republic of China.
Synthesis and Characterization of SOD Derivatives
Synthesis of TMC
TMC was synthesized by reductive methylation of chitosan based on the previously described method [ ] with some modifications [ ]. The degree of quaternization was calculated as 26.9 % using the data obtained from the 1 H-NMR spectra [ , ].
Synthesis of TMC-SOD Conjugates
TMC-SOD was prepared according to the method reported previously [ , ]. Twenty-five milligrams of Cu,Zn-SOD was added to 5 mL of TMC (25 mg/mL) phosphate buffer (20 mmol/L, pH 7.5). One hour and 30 min later, equimolar quantity of 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC-HCl) was added. The reaction mixture was agitated for 3 h at room temperature, followed by dialysis against distilled water at 4 °C. TMC-SOD was purified by DEAE-Sepharose Fast Flow column (2.6 cm × 30 cm, Pharmacia, Sweden) chromatography. The eluent showing SOD activity was dialyzed and then lyophilized.
The activity of TMC-SOD was determined by SOD assay kit (Nanjing, Jancheng Bioengineering Institute, China) following the instructions of the manufacturer. SOD assay was based on the ability to inhibit oxidation of oxyamine by the xanthine oxidase system. The enzyme activity of native SOD and TMC-SOD was 3250 and 2830 U/mg, respectively. The number of amino groups was determined with trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid using glycine as a standard [ ].
Isoelectric Focusing-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
Ampholyte (40 %, pH 3.5–10.0) was used to prepare isoelectric focusing (IEF) gel with acrylamide concentration of 5 %. The isoelectric focusing-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (IEF-PAGE) was carried out on Bio-Rad power PAC-300 and Mini-PROTEAN 3 cell provided by BIO-RADKWS at 150 V for 75 volt-hours (vh), then at 200 V for 500 vh. The IEF-PAGE gel unloaded samples was washed by double distilled water and sliced into pieces of 0.5 cm in length from acidic terminal to basic terminal, then separately dipped into Eppendorf tubes containing 2.0 mL of 10 mM KCl for 30 min. The pH value of the liquid around each slice was measured. The gel-loaded samples were fixed with 10 % trichloroacetic acid for 30 min and rinsed with destaining solution until the visible band is seen (0.25 % SDS, 33 % ethanol, and 10 % acetic acid).
CD Measurements
Circular dichroism (CD) spectra were recorded using a JASCO-820 type spectropolarimeter (JASCO, Tokyo, Japan) at 25 °C. Far-UV (wavelength 200–260 nm) CD spectra were recorded at a protein concentration of 5 mM in 67-mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) [ ].
Intracellular Localization of SOD and TMC-SOD
Harvesting and Culture of Macrophages
Elicited macrophages were collected from the peritoneal cavity of male Kunming mice (20∼23 g) with RPMI 1640 medium after intraperitoneal injection of 1 mL of 6.0 % starch medium for 3 days [ ]. Washed cells were suspended in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin G/streptomycin (100 U/mL). The cells were seeded on 6-well culture plates at a density of 1 × 10 5 cell/cm 3 (per well). After incubation for 4 h at 37 °C in 5 % CO 2 /95 % air, the macrophages were washed three times with RPMI 1640 medium.
Confocal Laser Microscope Analysis
Macrophages on the glass-bottom microwell dishes were washed with 1.5 mL of HBSS and incubated with 1.5 mL of HBSS containing 100 μg/mL FITC-labeled SOD or SOD derivatives at 37 °C. After appropriate time intervals, the cells were washed three times with 1.5 mL of iced HBSS and fixed with 1.5 mL of 10 % neutral formalin at 4 °C and observed under a confocal laser microscope ACAS 570 interactive laser cytometer, Meridian Instruments, Okemos, MI, USA. At least three sets of cells from each preparation were examined [ ].
Preparation of 125I-Labeled SOD and TMC-SOD
To minimize the oxidative inactivation, SOD and TMC-SOD were iodinated with Na 125 I (PerkinElmer) according to the mild Iodogen method with modification [ ]. Briefly, 5-mg protein was incubated with 2 mCi (1 Ci = 3.7 × 10 7 Bq) of carrier-free Na 125 I in a calibrated reaction vial with 500 μg of Iodogen reagent with gentle shaking for 30 min at room temperature. After incubation, the iodinated protein was removed and purified on a Sephadex G-25 gel column (Sigma Chemicals, St. Louis, MO, USA) equilibrated with sterile and pyrogen-free 0.01-M PBS buffer. The fractions containing 125 I-labeled SOD and 125 I-TMC-SOD were then collected and pooled. The harvested 125 I-SOD and 125 I-TMC-SOD were precipitated (>99 %) with 10 % ( v / v ) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in blank mouse plasma and tissue samples.
Dosing Solutions
125 I-labeled SOD and 125 I-TMC-SOD were dissolved in PBS, and optimal protein concentration for different dosages was used in the mice experiments. For each of the different dosage groups, a stock mixture solution of 125 I-labeled was prepared based on the dosages to be administered. Dose volumes were calculated based on the pretreatment body weights of animals, rounded to the nearest 0.01 mL and measured carefully in calibrated syringe to minimize the variability of the administered amounts of SOD to mice.
Pharmacokinetic Study
125 I-labeled mixture solution was administered as a single i.v. bolus injection via the tail vein in sterile and pyrogen-free physiological saline. At the following intervals after injection (3 min, 5 min, 15 min, 30 min, 1 h, 2 h, 6 h, 12 h, 18 h, 24 h after drug administration), blood samples (∼100 μL) were collected from the vena cava of mice under ether anesthesia or sacrificed. Then, plasma was obtained by centrifugation of the collected blood. To prevent the degradation of SOD, blood samples were immediately processed to obtain plasma by centrifugation at 2000× g at 4 °C for 10 min. The 125 I-SOD-associated radioactivity in the plasma samples was determined after precipitation with 10 % TCA ( v / v ) [ ]. The resultant TCA precipitates were counted for the radioactivity using a Packard Cobra II Auto-Gamma Counter to determine the 125 I radioactivity in SOD samples.
To further investigate biodistribution of TMC-SOD and SOD in the body, the tissues or organs of animals at different times (5 min, 1 h, 6 h, 18 h), such as the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, muscle, and fat, were removed, rinsed with PBS, and weighed. For radioactivity assay, small slices of each tissues/organs were weighed, recorded, and homogenized in 1 mL of ice-cold TCA (10 %) on ice. Homogenization was performed twice with 30 s each time using a Heidolph homogenizer (Heidolph Instruments GmbH & Co. KG, Germany). The homogenates were then centrifuged at 2000× g for 15 min at 4 °C, and the precipitation was counted for its radioactivity. The percentages of 125 I-labeled SOD in rat tissues and organs were expressed as the percent of the total administered dose recovered in each tissue/organ divided by the weight (% of total dose/g tissue) and compared with that in plasma. For plasma, the volume (in milliliters) was used instead of the weight (% of total dose/mL).
Statistical Analysis
All data are expressed as mean ± SD, unless otherwise noted. Statistical analysis of plasma pharmacokinetics was performed using 3P97 (Chinese Academy of Sciences Mathematics Research Institute). Statistical comparisons between the groups were carried out with Fisher’s exact test , and P < 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
Properties of TMC-SOD Derivatives
IEF-PAGE of SOD Conjugate
The isoelectric point (pI) of TMC-SOD derivative is different from that of native SOD. In TMC-SOD, the net electric charge of the SOD’s surface was changed from negative to positive. The result confirmed the theoretical pI of 3.4 of native SOD, showing a pI of 4.7–9.0 for SOD-TMC derivative. These different free amino acid residues combined ratio between TMC and native SOD might contribute to the mobility different on IEF-PAGE. TMC has no isoelectric point, so it did not represent any strap (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 IEF-PAGE of TMC, native SOD, and SOD-TMC conjugate. Marker ( lane 1 ), SOD-TMC conjugate ( lane 2 ), TMC ( lane 3 ), and SOD and TMC mixture ( lane 4 )
Secondary Structures of SOD Conjugate
The far-UV CD spectra of SOD and TMC-SOD derivative are almost identical. The spectroscopic properties of TMC-SOD derivative were almost identical to those of native SOD. Employed 3P97 software, the secondary structures of SOD and TMC-SOD were calculated (Table 1 ). Compared with native SOD, it was found that the α-helix of TMC-SOD was decreased; both the β-sheet and random coil were increased (Fig. 2 ). Table 1 The content of secondary structures of SOD and TMC-SOD Group The contents of secondary structures α-Helix β-Sheet (antiparallel) β-Sheet (parallel) β-Turn Random. coil SOD 23.50 % 20.00 % 10.30 % 19.50 % 31.90 % TMC-SOD 20.70 % 21.70 % 12.10 % 19.90 % 37.90 % Fig. 2 Far-UV CD spectra of SOD ( a ) and TMC-SOD derivatives ( b ). The protein concentration was 5 AM in 67-mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) at 25 °C
Intracellular Localization of SOD and TMC-SOD
To further characterize the cellular uptake of TMC-SOD, we studied the intracellular localization of FITC-labeled native SOD and SOD derivatives in macrophages using confocal laser scanning microscopy. Confocal microscopic observation demonstrated that the uptake of native SOD (Fig. 3a, b ) was minimal, while those of TMC-SOD (Fig. 3e, f ) were internalized into macrophages to a greater extent at 1 and 2 h. The result also showed that the uptake of TMC-SOD was time-dependent. Fig. 3 Intracellular localization of FITC-labeled SOD, heparin-SOD, and TMC-SOD in cultured mouse peritoneal macrophages. Macrophages were incubated with SOD at 37 °C for 1 h ( a ), with SOD at 37 °C for 2 h ( b ), with heparin-SOD at 37 °C for 1 h ( c ), with heparin-SOD at 37 °C for 2 h ( d ), with TMC-SOD at 37 °C for 1 h ( e ), and with TMC-SOD at 37 °C for 2 h ( f )
Plasma Pharmacokinetics of SOD and TMC-SOD in Mice
The plasma 125 I-SOD concentration-versus-time profiles following a single i.v bolus injection in mice are shown in Fig. 4 . These kinetic profiles were best fit using a two-compartment open model (Table 2 ). The plasma concentration of SOD and TMC-SOD over time followed an exponential decline after i.v administration. The Vc of SOD and TMC-SOD was 0.77 ± 0.15 and 3.79 ± 0.67, respectively, and the AUC 0–24 h was 0.463 ± 0.112 and 1.704 ± 0.123 (μg/mL) h, respectively, after i.v injection. Plasma 125 I-SOD concentration profiles showed a rapid initial distributive phase with estimated t 1/2a ranging from 0.15 ± 0.06 h, followed by a relatively slower elimination phase with t 1/2β values of 4.32 ± 0.54 h. Similar to 125 I-SOD, plasma 125 I-TMC-SOD concentration profiles showed a rapid initial distributive phase with an estimated t 1/2a value of 0.15 ± 0.06 h, followed by a relatively much more slower elimination phase with t 1/2β values of 4.32 ± 0.54 h. Fig. 4 The plasma concentration-time profiles of 125 I-SOD 125 I-heparin-SOD and 125 I-TMC-SOD following a single intravenous bolus injection in healthy mice ( n = 5 per time point) Table 2 Pharmacokinetic parameters after intravenous administrated of 125 I-SOD and 125 I-TMC-SOD derivatives in mice ( n = 5) Parameters Unit SOD TMC-SOD Vc (μg/h/(μg/mL) 0.77 ± 0.15 3.79 ± 0.67 a t 1/2α h 0.13 ± 0.06 0.15 ± 0.06 t 1/2β h 0.83 ± 0.12 4.32 ± 0.54 a k21 1/h 5.61 ± 1.12 1.86 ± 0.24 a k12 1/h 40.50 ± 5.23 2.56 ± 0.61 a AUC (μg/mL)/h 0.463 ± 0.112 1.704 ± 0.132 a CL(s) (μg/h/(μg/mL) 4.755 ± 0.231 1.525 ± 0.127 a Vp (μg/h/(μg/mL) 5.57 ± 1.02 5.23 ± 0.21 Vdss (μg/h/(μg/mL) 6.34 ± 0.99 9.01 ± 1.12 SOD superoxide dismutase, TMC-SOD N , N , N -trimethyl chitosan chloride SOD a Compared with SOD group, the difference was considered significant, P < 0.05
Tissue Distribution of SOD and TMC-SOD in Mice
The amounts of 125 I-SOD and 125 I-TMC-SOD in mice after a single i.v dose are shown in Fig. 5 . Both 125 I-SOD and 125 I-TMC-SOD underwent a rapid and wide distribution in the various tissues and organs throughout the body. Five minutes after SOD and TMC-SOD administration, the majority of radioactivity was detected in highly perfused tissues and organs, with the highest radioactivity levels detected in the kidneys (35.06 ± 2.88 vs 38.84 ± 6.11 % injected dose/g), followed by the lung (6.21 ± 0.82 vs 24.98 ± 1.87 % injected dose/g), liver (7.27 ± 1.11 vs 11.80 ± 1.44 % injected dose/g), fat (2.70 ± 0.12 vs 4.17 ± 1.06 % injected dose/g), spleen (2.56 ± 0.60 vs 3.65 ± 0.27 % injected dose/g), and muscle (2.45 ± 0.77 vs 4.74 ± 1.19 % injected dose/g). Less than 5 % of the dosed radioactivity remained in the body by 18 h postdosing. The radioactivity in the various tissues and organs reached the maximum level at approximately lessen than 5 min postdosing and reduced as rapidly as the kidneys. The radioactivity in some tissues such as the liver, heart, spleen, muscle, and fat was much lower compared to the lung and kidney. Fig. 5 Compared body distribution of 125 I-SOD with 125 I-TMC-SOD after intravenous injection ( n = 5)
Since the densities of the various tissues/organs are not identical, the concentrations in individual tissues/organs were compared with that in plasma. A tissue-to-plasma percentage greater than 100 % for a given tissue/organ suggests a higher accumulation of the protein in that tissue/organ during the period examined. The result showed that, for native SOD, only kidneys at postdosing points had a value more than 100 %, while for TMC-SOD, both the lungs and kidneys at postdosing points had a value more than 100 %, suggesting a marked lung and renal trapping of TMC-SOD (Fig. 5 ).
Discussion
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are dangerous intermediates of cellular oxygen metabolisms and are involved in pathogenesis of a wide range of diseases. ROS has been implicated in many pathobiochemical processes such as inflammation, ischemic, and hyperoxicinjuries. Therefore, degradation of ROS appears to represent important therapeutic goals. Superoxide dismutases (SODs) are an important part of antioxidant defense systems in mammalian cells capable of reducing the harmful effect of ROS on human tissues. The use of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT), representative antioxidant enzymes catabolizing superoxide and hydrogen peroxide, respectively, has been examined for various ROS-mediated injuries, especially those associated with ischemia/reperfusion [ , , ]. However, anti-inflammatory and antifibrotic effects of the major oxygen free radical scavenging enzyme SOD have been very challenging in vivo. Relevant effects have only been found in vitro, which may be related to the very short half-life of oxygen radicals. To increase the plasma half-life of these enzymes, conjugation with macromolecules such as polyethylene glycol derivatives has been carried out, and PEG–SOD conjugate is commercially available [ , ]. However, PEG is only inertia stuff, and coupling of SOD to PEG does not induce an increased uptake of this scavenger in target cells [ ]. The damage induced by ROS is characterized by site-specific events. Therefore, if antioxidant enzymes are to be used for the treatment, they should be located in close proximity to the site of inflammation. ROS were mainly produced by surface negatively charged macrophages [ ]. Since SOD is also negatively charged, one way to attach SOD to macrophages is to change its electric charge property. Cationization and glycosylation have also been applied to SOD, and effects involving interaction with tissues and biological activities have been reported [ , , ]. Chitosan is a cationic polysaccharide made from alkaline N -deacetylation of chitin. As a natural product, antioxidant activity of chitosan and its derivatives has attracted much attention [ , , , ]. It was proved that low molecular weight chitosan had a high radical scavenging activity for ·OH and low radical scavenging ability for \( {\mathrm{O}}_2^{\overline{\bullet}} \) [ , ]. N , N , N -Trimethyl chitosan chloride (TMC), a derivative of chitosan with more positive charge than chitosan, is soluble in the entire pH range and has been proven to be a potent absorption enhancer of peptide drugs by opening the tight junctions between epithelial cells, thereby facilitating the cellular transport of hydrophilic compounds [ , ]. In TMC-SOD, the net electric charge of the SOD’s surface was changed from negative to positive (Fig. 1 ), the isoelectric point of TMC-SOD derivative was obviously distinct from that of native SOD, it appeared between 4.7 and 9.0, and its cellular uptake was greatly enhanced than SOD without cationization (Fig. 3 ). Subsequently, its inhibitory effect on superoxide anion release from macrophages was also improved in our early study [ ]. We speculated that the enhanced inhibitory effect was due to the ability of TMC-SOD to localize in the vicinity of NADPH-oxidase in the membrane of macrophages and the ability of antioxidation of chitosan. It was reported that proteoglycans and other anionic molecules have been shown to be present at the sites on the cell membrane that interact with cationic compounds through electrostatic interactions [ , , , ]. We also speculate that such localization can be accomplished by attachment of the modified enzymes to the inflamed tissues, as more macrophages will appear in inflamed positions. TMC-SOD would thus be useful for the therapy of inflammatory diseases mediated by superoxide anions generated by macrophages.
It is well established that 125 I-labeled therapeutic proteins and peptides are stable, which have been widely used in the pharmacokinetic studies [ , ]. In this study, it is expected that the 125 I-labeled SOD and TMC-SOD would also be stable to be used in a tissue distribution and pharmacokinetic study in mice. TCA-based radioactivity assay has been widely used in the pharmacokinetic study of protein and peptide drugs. In this study, we measured the SOD and TMC-SOD content based on the TCA-precipitated fractions rather than total radioactivity (TCA-precipitable and soluble fraction) in the plasma. TCA-precipitated radioactivity assay measures parent (unchanged drug) and possible metabolites of SOD, but not free iodide. The high specificity and sensitivity of TCA-based radioactivity assay make it an important approach for quantification of proteins/peptides. In this study, it was proved that after modification with TMC, the plasma half-life of TMC-SOD derivative becomes longer (Table 2 and Fig. 4 ). We speculated that covalent coupling of activated TMC to amino groups of SOD masks this protein from recognition by the immune system and improves its pharmacokinetics. Following i.v bolus injection of 125 I labeling SOD and TMC-SOD, the plasma concentration data over time was best fitted to a two-compartment open pharmacokinetic model (Table 2 ). Compared with native SOD, the AUC 0–24 h of TMC-SOD was increased. The AUC 0–24 h values of SOD and TMC-SOD were 0.463 ± 0.112 and 1.704 ± 0.132 μg/h/mL after i.v injection, respectively.
The tissue distribution of SOD and TMC-SOD was also investigated following a single i.v administration to mice. Following drug administration by i.v, the 125 I labeling SOD, associated radioactivity, was widely distributed into various tissues/organs (less than 5 min), and the majority of radioactivity was associated with the kidneys, while following drug administration by i.v, the 125 I-TMC-SOD, radioactivity in lungs and kidneys, was markedly higher. In this study, both native SOD and TMC-SOD in distributed tissues were rapidly disposed. Compared with TMC-SOD, native SOD was more sharply decreased over time in most tissues by measuring its radioactivity. Compared with native SOD, the higher amounts of TMC-SOD radioactivity were found in the lungs. Since the lungs are not the known target of 125 I, the most possible reason is that TMC-SOD binds to its specific targets in the lungs. The high radioactivity of TMC-SOD detected in lung suggested a trapping site of the protein in the lung, which indicates possible delivery of TMC-SOD through the lung. Therefore, the administration of TMC-SOD may be an optional therapeutic and preventive measure against oxidative stress-induced lung injury. These results demonstrated that cationic polysaccharide SOD derivatives might prevent and treat of ROS-mediated inflammatory diseases.