Introduction
Pharmacokinetics studies the rate at which drugs are absorbed, distributed, metabolized, and excreted from the body. Therapeutic drugs can be delivered in a variety of ways, resulting in different concentration versus time profiles in the body. In addition, the pharmacokinetic profile of a drug is influenced by other factors such as metabolism, body size, and certain pathologies [ , ]. The study of a drug’s pharmacokinetic profile is a very important aspect of pharmaceutical research and makes up the basis of clinical pharmacokinetics. A good understanding of pharmacokinetics allows scientists to design useful drugs and practitioners to prescribe proper treatment without drugs reaching toxic levels in the body.
Pharmaceutical research is dedicated to developing safe drugs with minimal side effects, predictable pharmacokinetic properties, and negligible interactions with other drugs. Today, the task of screening new chemical entities and pharmaceutical formulations for their pharmacokinetic properties (absorption, permeability, distribution, and metabolic stability) is an important aspect but also a bottleneck in drug discovery [ , , , , , , , ]. Furthermore, students and scientists need to be trained in using modern pharmacokinetic and analytical techniques that are applicable in pharmaceutical research. At the same time, there is considerable interest in decreasing to a minimum the use of live animals for experiments. Therefore, there is an increasing need to develop robust in vitro assays which can accurately reproduce and predict human data.
To address these issues, numerous researchers reported the development of a remarkable variety of artificial organ systems that can predict drug clearance and metabolism in humans [ , , , , , ]. The most advanced models appear to be the physiologically realistic microHuman and milliHuman, which are able to operate for weeks and even months [ ]. Whenever possible, in vitro experiments are preferable to in vivo experiments since no animals are involved, they are less costly to perform, they can be used to assess efficacy and emergence of resistance, multiple samples can be easily collected, pharmacokinetic controls can be implemented, and many in vivo conditions can be accurately simulated. As a result, in vitro studies are now making significant contributions to drug development and drug safety testing.
Despite recent developments in artificial organ systems, one of the main challenges of these miniaturized devices continues to consist of correctly matching the ratios of volume, mass, and flow rate between different organs on the chips [ , ]. Additional challenges include difficulty in monitoring system status, unavailability of a universal cell culture medium, and affordability. Due to these significant challenges, achievements to date have been limited to relatively simple metabolic interactions. All these devices for investigating drug pharmacokinetics are based on microfabricated chips that include compartments with live cells. Even though these live cells are essential for accurate prediction of drug pharmacokinetics, they are making the devices complicated, fragile, and difficult to use.
Furthermore, existing devices for in vitro pharmacokinetic modeling focus on predicting drug pharmacokinetics and are not suitable for directly generating fluids with preset drug pharmacokinetic profiles. To address this particular necessity, a mechanical system that can generate a multitude of realistic, high-quality pharmacokinetic profiles was designed. The new device is especially valuable when the pharmacokinetic parameters of a drug are known , and fluids with corresponding pharmacokinetic profiles need to be generated for basic pharmacokinetic research, training purposes, or for studying the influence of variable drug concentrations on cells and tissues.
This article describes the successful development of a fluidic device for in vitro simulation of drug pharmacokinetic profiles including absorption, distribution, and elimination. A variety of drug administration routes were simulated by controlling the drug delivery rate for a single dose or multiple doses. Drug distribution was simulated for both one-compartment (1C) and two-compartment (2C) models by adjusting the geometry of the device and fluid flow rates. Finally, zero-order and first-order elimination profiles were generated by controlling the fluid exchange rate. Numerous profiles can be generated by properly combining the various elements of the device, showing the effectiveness of the proposed fluidic system and demonstrating that it can reproduce the pharmacokinetic profiles observed in the plasma of a live specimen. The device is intended to “copy” the pharmacokinetic (PK) profile of a compound, based on preset parameters, for teaching and research purposes.
Materials and Methods
Reagents and Materials
Methyl blue (powder), diazepam, and carbamazepine were bought from Sigma (Atlanta, GA). Stock solutions of methyl blue in water were prepared weekly. Deionized water was obtained from a Siemens water purification system. Assortments of silicone tubing for peristaltic pumps and tubing connectors were purchased from VWR International, Inc. (Pittsburgh, PA).
Equipment
Spectrophotometric analysis was performed using a Waters 490E Programmable Multiwavelength Detector and a Waters 441 Absorbance Detector (Milford, MA), depending on availability in the laboratory. Fluid recirculation and exchange was achieved using PD5201 peristaltic pumps from Heidolph North America (Elk Grove Village, IL). The pumps were equipped with single-channel pump heads for fluid recirculation and dual-channel pump heads for fluid exchange. Drug administration by infusion and zero-order absorption was achieved using a syringe pump from KD Scientific (Holliston, MA). Drug administration by first-order absorption was simulated using a 50-cm vertical tube filled with the drug solution. Before use, all pumps were calibrated according to manufacturer instructions. A digital laboratory hot plate magnetic stirrer from Thermo Scientific (Waltham, MA) was used for additional mixing of the circulating fluid in the central compartment.
Online Analysis by UV-VIS Spectrophotometry
Methyl blue has a maximum absorbance between 594 and 610 nm. Its absorbance was monitored online at 600 nm by passing the circulatory fluid of the pharmacokinetic profile generator through the detector cell. Before use, the detector was calibrated using standard solutions prepared by serial dilutions of the stock solution. The seven-point calibration curves were repeated at least three times and each had r 2 > 0.99. For each pharmacokinetic simulation, the concentration of methyl blue was calculated from its absorbance and the most recent calibration equation. Intra- and inter-day coefficients of variation were less than 3.1 and 6.3 %, respectively.
Data Analysis
Pharmacokinetic data analysis was performed individually for each concentration versus time profile generated. The collected data points were plotted in SigmaPlot v10 and Microsoft Excel 2010. Curve fitting to equations specific to each model was done in PKFit v1.2.3 [ ] and SigmaPlot v10 to obtain corresponding pharmacokinetic parameters.
Equations for One-Compartment Simulations
Data from IV bolus experiments with first-order elimination were fitted to Eq. 1 . This equation was also used after interruption of IV infusion and for the first dose in the multiple IV bolus dose regimen. $$ {C}_t={C}_0{e}^{-{k}_et} $$ (1) where C t is the drug concentration at time t , C 0 is the initial drug concentration, and k e is the drug elimination rate constant.
The formulas used for fitting the data from IV infusion, first-order absorption (oral administration), and zero-order elimination after an IV bolus are shown in Eqs. 2 , 3 , and 4 . $$ {C}_t = {C}_{\mathrm{ss}}\left(1-{e}^{-{k}_et}\right) $$ (2) $$ {C}_t=\frac{A\cdot {k}_{\mathrm{a}}}{\left({k}_{\mathrm{a}}-{k}_{\mathrm{e}}\right)}\left({e}^{-{k}_{\mathrm{e}}t}-{e}^{-{k}_{\mathrm{a}}t}\right) $$ (3) $$ {C}_t = -{k}_{\mathrm{e}}t+{C}_0 $$ (4) where C ss is the drug concentration at steady state, A is a constant, and k a is the absorption rate constant.
Equations for Two-Compartment Simulations
The IV bolus and IV infusion profiles for the 2C models were fitted to Eqs. 5 and 6 . $$ {C}_t=A{e}^{- at}-B{e}^{-bt} $$ (5) $$ {C}_t = {C}_{\mathrm{ss}}\ \left(1-A{e}^{- at}-B{e}^{-bt}\right) $$ (6) where A and B are constants (with different values and significance for bolus and infusion), a is the distribution phase rate constant, and b is the elimination phase rate constant.
Other Pharmacokinetic Parameters
The apparent volume of distribution ( V d ), total body clearance (Cl), concentration at steady state ( C ss ), volume of the central compartment ( V p ), and volume of distribution during the elimination phase ( V d β ) were calculated using Eqs. 7 to 11. $$ {V}_{\mathrm{d}} = \frac{\mathrm{Dose}}{C_0} $$ (7) $$ Cl = {V}_{\mathrm{d}} \times {k}_{\mathrm{e}} $$ (8) $$ {C}_{\mathrm{ss}} = \frac{R}{V_{\mathrm{d}} \times {k}_{\mathrm{e}}} $$ (9) $$ {V}_{\mathrm{p}} = \frac{\mathrm{Dose}}{A+B} $$ (10) $$ {V}_{\mathrm{d}\ \beta } = \frac{\mathrm{Cl}}{b} $$ (11) where R is the rate of drug infusion.
Results
A robust fluidic device was created and used for generating a wide variety of drug pharmacokinetic profiles by combining various modules for simulating drug delivery, distribution, and elimination. Several combinations representative for key pharmacokinetic models are reported in this article, along with a brief review of the main characteristics of these models.
Design of the Fluidic Device
The overall design of the fluidic device resembles that of a physiological pharmacokinetic model, with a main loop for fluid recirculation that feeds various compartments for the simulated organs, liver, and kidney, as shown in Fig. 1 . The setup for extravascular administration is for routes that bypass the liver (transdermal, buccal, intramuscular, etc.); for oral administration with first pass elimination, the drug can be administered before the liver compartment. Fig. 1 Overall schematic of the pharmacokinetic profile generator; details about the simulated organs, liver, and kidney are shown in Figs. 2 , 3 , and 4
As shown in Fig. 2 , the artificial organs were simulated by Fig. 2 Design of the artificial organs. a One-compartment model: the volume of the tube is smaller than that of the central fluid; b Two-compartment model: the volume of the tube is larger than that of the central fluid; c Multi-compartment model: tubes of different volumes are used, and the flow rate through each tube is controlled individually; each subsequent tube adds an extra compartment to the simulation A single tube with a volume smaller than that of the central fluid for simulating 1C models (Fig. 2a ) A single tube with a volume larger than that of the central fluid for simulating 2C models (Fig. 2b ) Multiple tubes with different volumes and different flow rates for simulating multiple compartments (Fig. 2c )
Hepatic elimination by the simulated liver was achieved by using A tube and a dual-channel pump (Fig. 3a ) that simultaneously removes fluid with drug from circulation and replaces it with an equal volume of drug-free fluid Fig. 3 Design of the artificial liver. a Fluid exchange approach: a dual-channel pump simultaneously removes fluid with drug form circulation and replaces it with an equal volume of drug-free fluid; b Enzymatic approach: the tube contains a flow-through bed with immobilized enzymes; flow through the artificial liver is controlled by a pump A tube that contains a flow-through bed with immobilized enzymes (Fig. 3b ; data not shown in the paper)
Finally, renal elimination by the simulated kidney was accomplished by A tube and a dual-channel pump (Fig. 4a ) that simultaneously removes fluid with drug from circulation and replaces it with an equal volume of drug-free fluid (as in the case of the artificial liver) Fig. 4 Design of the artificial kidney. a Fluid exchange approach: a dual-channel pump simultaneously removes fluid with drug form circulation and replaces it with an equal volume of drug-free fluid; b A tube that contains multiple hollow semipermeable membranes and a counter-current flow of drug-free fluid Filtration through semipermeable membranes (Fig. 4b ); the circulatory fluid containing the drug flows through multiple hollow semipermeable membranes while drug-free fluid flows in counter-current outside of the hollow membranes; the drug is removed by diffusion across the semipermeable membranes (data not shown in the paper)
Bolus drug administration was simulated by quick injection in the central circulatory system. Drug absorption was simulated by zero-order infusion or first-order delivery into the central fluid flask.
For the particular set of experiments reported in this article, the volume of fluid (as volume of distribution) and the fluid flow rates were chosen to match those that would be observed in an adult rat [ ] for a drug with relatively homogenous distribution in the whole body. The fluid flow rates for the main loop and organs were set at 56.1 and 18.6 mL/min unless otherwise specified and were controlled by single-channel pump heads. The total volume for the 1C model was 185 mL, while for the 2C model, it was 327 mL. This was achieved by exchanging the organ tube from a volume of 11 to 152 mL. The volume in the central fluid compartment was maintained constant at 50 mL for all experimental setups.
The 1C system was used in the initial sets of experiments for simulating profiles for drugs with linear pharmacokinetics. An IV bolus injection was the first experiment with this model. A syringe was used to quickly inject the test compound into a tube returning to the central fluid compartment. The varying methyl blue concentrations were calculated from absorbance and recorded in Microsoft Excel 2010. The next experiment was an IV infusion, where a kdScientific syringe pump was used to infuse the solution of the test compound at a constant rate into the central fluid compartment; rapid mixing was achieved using a magnetic stir bar. To simulate oral administration with first-order absorption, a first-order delivery mechanism was created using a transfer pipette and 50 cm of tubing mounted vertically; with the use of gravity, the drug solution would drip into the central fluid compartment with first-order kinetics of delivery (confirmed in separate experiments by measuring the amount of solution delivered at various time intervals). A multiple IV bolus pharmacokinetic profile was also generated, where 0.3 mL of the test compound solution would be administered into the central compartment every 20 min for 3 h. The final 1C experiment consisted of creating an IV bolus profile with zero-order elimination by continuously increasing clearance so that the concentration of the test compound decreased linearly in time. The fluidic device was also used to simulate a 2C model by significantly increasing the volume of the artificial organ and controlling the fluid flow rate. IV bolus curves were created for the 2C model with normal (18.6 mL/min), decreased (8.9 mL/min), and increased (37.4 mL/min) organ compartment flow rates. IV infusion profiles were also generated for the 2C model with normal flow rates.
One-Compartment Simulation
One-compartment models represent the body as a kinetically homogeneous unit. Drug kinetics is characterized simplistically, as the drug entering the body is considered to mix instantaneously with the whole system and elimination starts immediately.
With the proposed device, rapid distribution according to the one-compartment model was accomplished by using a small organ volume (11 mL) as shown in Fig. 2a . Drug elimination was achieved using the devices shown in Figs. 3a and 4a , representing the simulated liver and the simulated kidneys, respectively. This setup was used to generate realistic pharmacokinetic profiles for IV bolus, IV infusion, first-order absorption, multiple IV bolus doses, and zero-order elimination, shown in Fig. 5a–e . Fig. 5 Experimental pharmacokinetic profiles of one-compartment models simulating a IV bolus; b IV infusion; c first-order absorption; d multiple IV bolus administration; and e IV bolus with zero-order elimination. Note: all data points include error bars (±SD), although most are too small to be visible
A solution of methyl blue of 5 g/L was used for administration for each experimental setup; the volumes delivered were 0.75 mL for IV bolus, 1.8 mL over 2.5 h for IV infusion, 0.95 mL for first-order absorption, nine doses of 0.30 mL for multiple IV bolus, and 0.75 mL for IV bolus with zero-order elimination. IV bolus profiles that match previously published pharmacokinetic data for diazepam and carbamazepine are shown in the Supplementary information available online.
Two-Compartment Simulation
Two compartment models are used for drugs that follow a bi-exponential profile representing slow equilibration with peripheral tissues. Using the fluidic pharmacokinetic profile generator, slow distribution according to the two-compartment model was accomplished by using an artificial organ tube with a volume of 152 mL (larger than that of the circulatory system), as shown in Fig. 2b . Drug elimination was achieved using the devices shown in Figs. 3a and 4a , representing the liver and the kidneys, respectively. This setup was used to generate realistic pharmacokinetic profiles for IV bolus at normal fluid flow rates, decreased organ fluid flow rate, increased organ fluid flow rate, and for IV infusion at normal flow rates, as shown in Fig. 6a–d . Fig. 6 Experimental pharmacokinetic profiles for two-compartment models simulating a IV bolus profile at normal organ flow rate (18.6 mL/min); b decreased flow (8.9 mL/min) IV bolus profile; c increased flow (37.4 mL/min) IV bolus profile; d IV infusion profile. Note: all data points include error bars (±SD), although most are too small to be visible
A solution of methyl blue of 5 g/L was used for administration for each experimental setup; the volumes delivered were 0.75 mL for IV bolus and 5.5 mL over 5.0 h for IV infusion.
Discussion
The fluidic pharmacokinetic profile generator that was developed allowed for an easy transition from the 1C to the 2C model simply by changing the volume of the organ compartment. The volume of distribution for each model can be easily adjusted as needed by adding more fluid in the central compartment or by changing the volume of the artificial organs. Renal and hepatic clearance can be adjusted simply by changing the flow rates of the corresponding pumps.
The only report of a fluidic device for teaching pharmacokinetics dates back to 1979 when students and teachers at the University of Nottingham Medical School build a hydraulic model for simulating linear pharmacokinetics. Their device consisted of a cylinder filled periodically with fluid and drained from a bottom vent; the drug concentration was represented by fluid depth and the volume of distribution by the vessel cross-sectional area [ ]. In contrast, the currently proposed device generates actual drug solutions with time-dependent concentrations; the fluid can be sampled for training purposes, or it can be used to expose cultured cells to continuously variable drug concentrations.
Methyl blue was chosen as the first test compound because it is stable, water soluble, and has an intense UV/VIS absorbance. Furthermore, the intense visible color of methyl blue makes visual investigation of the course of experiments very facile—emphasizing the usefulness of the pharmacokinetic profile generator as a training tool. Pharmacokinetic profiles for other compounds (diazepam and carbamazepine) with different doses and clearances are shown in Figs. A.1 and A.2 .
Realistic PK profiles were generated for each of the chosen models. For each experimental setup, there were three trials to generate these PK profiles. Pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated individually for each profile. To show the reproducibility of the concentration versus time curves, the mean values of test compound concentrations for each setup were plotted on graphs with vertical error bars based on each point’s standard deviation. The coefficient of correlation ( r 2 ) for the corresponding pharmacokinetic equation is shown on the right side of each graph. PK parameters obtained by curve fitting for the 1C model are shown in Table 1 for all of the associated experiments. Since the 2C model is more complex than the 1C model, more parameters are associated with the corresponding PK profiles and are shown in Table 2 . The graphs with the correlations (Figs. 5 and 6 ) and the pharmacokinetic parameters with the associated relative standard deviations (RSDs) show that the proposed device can reproducibly generate pharmacokinetic profiles with specified characteristics (volume of distribution and clearance, designed to match those of a rat in the current setup). Although the proposed device resembles a physiological PK model, it can easily produce PK profiles matching compartment models, just like the drug concentration in a live organism can be modeled based on compartment representations. Table 1 Average pharmacokinetic parameters with associated RSDs for profiles generated using the 1C setup of the simulator PK parameter/model k e , min −1 (%) V d , mL (%) Cl, mL/min (%) C 0 , mg/L (%) C ss , mg/L (%) k a , min −1 (%) IV bolus 0.033 ± 1.3 91 ± 0.52 3.1 ± 1.2 41 ± 0.52 – – IV infusion 0.036 ± 10 103 ± 4.0 3.7 ± 6.3 – 16 ± 6.4 – First-order absorption 0.038 ± 4.1 89 ± 2.5 3.4 ± 1.6 – – 0.51 ± 2.4 Multiple IV bolus 0.040 ± 2.4 81 ± 2.0 3.3 ± 4.2 19 ± 1.9 36 ± 5.5 – Zero-order bolus 0.59 ± 0.79 84 ± 0.75 – 45 ± 0.75 – – Table 2 Average pharmacokinetic parameters with associated RSDs for profiles generated using the 2C setup of the simulator PK parameter/model A § , mg/L (%) a , min −1 (%) B § , mg/L (%) b , min −1 (%) V p , mL (%) V d β , mL (%) Cl, mL/min (%) C 0 or C ss, mg/L (%) IV bolus normal 79 ± 7.8 0.50 ± 2.2 24 ± 1.4 0.013 ± 0.41 36 ± 5.9 142 ± 0.95 1.9 ± 1.2 103 ± 5.7 IV bolus decrease 79 ± 7.5 0.24 ± 2.2 20 ± 0.92 0.012 ± 2.6 37 ± 5.9 154 ± 0.17 1.9 ± 2.5 99 ± 5.7 IV bolus increase 67 ± 7.3 0.88 ± 1.4 27 ± 2.2 0.014 ± 0.68 40 ± 5.3 133 ± 2.1 1.9 ± 2.5 94 ± 5.2 IV infusion 0.084 ± 6.0 0.45 ± 11 0.92 ± 0.76 0.014 ± 3.8 39 ± 9.9 141 ± 3.1 1.9 ± 0.81 48 ± 0.81 § The A and B constants have different values and significance for bolus and infusion
One-Compartment Simulation
The PK profiles for the 1C IV bolus injection experiments are shown in Fig. 5a . The concentration versus time data follows exactly the profile described by Eq. 1 . Based on the graphed data, it took 89 min for 95 % of the drug to be eliminated, and the experiment was interrupted shortly after.
The IV infusion profiles generated with the fluidic device are illustrated in Fig. 5b , and, as expected, the data fits very well with Eq. 2 for IV infusion. After stopping the infusion of methyl blue, the concentration versus time curve started to decrease exponentially, as shown by the second curve in Fig. 5b , which was plotted from time zero on the graph for easier viewing. The graph encompasses two coefficients of correlation, one for the infusion period and one for the post-infusion period. Both coefficients show excellent correlation with Eq. 2 for IV infusion and Eq. 1 for IV bolus. Based on the data, it took 88 min for 95 % of the steady state to be reached, which matches the value obtained for IV bolus. Administration by infusion was performed over 7.3 elimination half-lives; after stopping the infusion, data recording was continued for extra 4.5 half-lives to demonstrate the ability of the proposed system to generate complex pharmacokinetic profiles.
PK profiles with first-order absorption were simulated using a first-order drug administration mechanism based on a long vertical tube filled with the solution to be delivered and are shown in Fig. 5c . The data fits very well the corresponding Eq. 3 . Since the absorption rate constant was chosen to be larger than the elimination rate constant, as is the case for most pharmaceutical formulations, the drug rapidly reaches its peak concentration. Oral absorption with first pass effect can be simulated by administering the drug to the artificial liver at zero- or first-order rates, when only a fraction of the administered drug reaches systemic circulation (data not shown; the resulting graph is equivalent to administering a lower dose).
A multiple dosage regimen was simulated by administering a sequence of nine IV bolus injections as shown in Fig. 5d . Steady state was reached between 80 and 100 min into the experiment, which matches the data obtained for IV infusion. Furthermore, as expected, steady-state levels were adequately maintained as long as the test compound was administered.
While most drug molecules are eliminated by first-order processes, some drugs saturate elimination mechanisms and their pharmacokinetic profile matches a zero-order process. A 1C model with bolus administration and zero-order elimination was created by continuously increasing drug clearance (fluid exchange pump flow rate) so that the drug concentration decreased linearly in time, as shown in Fig. 5e . The PK parameters for this experiment and for all other 1C experiments were obtained by curve fitting and are shown in Table 1 .
Somewhat surprisingly, the zero-order (saturable) elimination profile was more challenging to achieve experimentally than the first-order elimination. This was largely due to the fact that the flow rates of the pumps had to be continuously increased over the duration of the experiment in order to clear the drug from a larger and larger fraction of the systemic fluid. Conversely, all first-order elimination profiles were achieved conveniently at a constant fluid exchange flow rate (constant clearance).
Two-Compartment Simulation
Drugs that diffuse slowly from the central compartment into tissues are best modeled using bi-exponential equations. The 2C behavior is most readily observable after IV bolus administration of the drug followed by plotting the concentration data on semi-log graphs. Since many drugs follow this type of pharmacokinetic profile, it is important to be able to simulate it in vitro—which was achieved by using an artificial organ volume approximately three times larger than that of the main circulatory system. More data points were collected for the initial portion of the profiles to accurately record the quick changes that occur during the distribution phase. In addition to the regular fluid flow rates that would be observed in a rat, two more sets of experiments were done to investigate the influence of increased and decreased flow to organs. This was done only in the case of the two-compartment simulation since blood flow influences distribution only for multicompartment models.
The first set of experiments for the 2C model was done for IV bolus injections at regular fluid flow rates for a rat; the resulting graphs are shown in Fig. 6a (the vertical ± SD error bars are too small to be seen). A semi-logarithmic scale was used in order to easily distinguish the two phases. As expected, the concentration decreased bi-exponentially and fitted perfectly to an equation with four parameters (correlation coefficient of 1.0; parameters shown in Table 2 ). According to the graph, the distribution phase ended after about 7 min.
Tissue blood flow rate has an important impact on drug distribution in the case of drugs that follow multicompartment models, especially when drug distribution is perfusion limited. To demonstrate the applicability of the proposed fluidic device, flow to the artificial organ was initially decreased to half. As expected, distribution took longer. The change in fluid flow affected most noticeably the rate constant of distribution, which decreased from a value of 0.50 min −1 for normal flow to 0.24 min −1 for decreased flow (Table 2 ). As shown in Fig. 6b , the system remained in the distribution phase for approximately 14 min.
Figure 6c depicts the profile for an IV bolus injection with 2C behavior, but with approximately twice the normal organ compartment flow rate. As expected, the distribution phase ended much sooner than in the profiles shown in Fig. 6a, b , taking about 3.5 min to complete. The rate constant of distribution increased from a value of 0.50 min −1 for normal flow to 0.88 min −1 for increased flow (Table 2 ). Increased flow led to quicker mixing and equilibration, which allowed the transition to the elimination phase to occur earlier. Overall, the three IV bolus setups (with normal, increased, and decreased flow) show that the proposed fluidic device can simulate PK profiles with various distribution rate constants by simply adjusting the flow rates of the pumps.
Since with the exception of IV bolus administration most PK profiles appear rather similar visually for the 1C and 2C models, the only additional experiments for the 2C setup consisted of generating IV infusion profiles, which are shown in Fig. 6d . In the case of the 2C model, the initial increase in concentration is not as rapid as for the 1C model since the drug from the central compartment is being both eliminated from the system and distributed into the second compartment. The time to reach steady state was 210 min, much longer than 80 min needed in the case of the 1C model. The PK parameters associated with all 2C experiments are shown in Table 2 .
Device Performance
The newly developed fluidic device proved adequate for generating numerous realistic PK profiles according to 1C and 2C models. Unlike cell-based models, the proposed mechanical device is very precise in generating concentration versus time curves—as shown by low RSDs and coefficients of correlation close to 1 (Figs. 5 and 6 , Tables 1 and 2 ). The coefficients of correlation for the 1C model were a little lower than those for the 2C model, since equations with more parameters usually result in a better fit. The highest RSDs in PK parameters were encountered for the multiple IV bolus and the IV infusion experiments. Higher variation in the multiple IV bolus experiment was expected since the test compound doses were administered manually every 20 min for 3 h. The parameters for the IV infusion also had higher RSDs, most likely because this was the longest of the 1C experiments, so small variations in the flow rates of infusion, recirculation, and elimination had a higher impact on the final steady-state concentration.
The basic device (built only from tubes and pumps) generates the PK profiles based on physical fluid manipulation alone, which is independent of the physico-chemical properties of the drug, as long as the drug is chemically stable; the volume of distribution is controlled by the amount of fluid introduced in the system, and clearance is solely controlled by the flow rates of the pumps corresponding to the liver and kidneys.
When using the dual-channel pumps for fluid exchange (Figs. 3a and 4a ), it is very important to precisely match the fluid extraction rate with the fluid replenishing rate in order to avoid fluctuations in the volume of the central compartment. This potentially confounding factor was eliminated by checking the flow rates of the dual-channel pump heads before each experiment; if a discrepancy was observed, the tubing placement in the pump head was adjusted until the flow rates of the two channels were perfectly matched. Better peristaltic pumps, or even different pump types (e.g., diaphragm pumps), would likely eliminate the need to check the flow rates before each experiment. The 1C IV bolus injection setups with first-order and zero-order eliminations produced the most stable concentration profiles, both having extremely low RSDs and nearly perfect coefficients of correlation. The 2C designs were also able to reproducibly generate proper pharmacokinetic profiles in a variety of conditions. All of the 2C experiments, except for the increased flow rate IV injection (where r 2 was 0.9998), had a perfect coefficient of correlation. The fitted PK parameters also had low RSDs. As expected, altering the organ flow rate of the 2C model changed the PK profile correspondingly by significantly altering the distribution rate constant. Therefore, the proposed 2C model could be useful for studying the influence of variable fluid flow rate on drug distribution in various cell culture experiments.
Conclusions
When applicable, in vitro research allows for easier experimental setup and much more reproducible results without the expense of an animal’s life. These studies are also significantly faster, safer, and cheaper than typical in vivo experiments. PK profiles are usually studied in vivo (in laboratory animals or volunteers) or predicted in vitro using complicated microfluidic devices based on live cells. Once the PK parameters of a drug are known and fluids with specific drug concentration versus time profiles are needed, they can be accurately generated using the proposed in vitro PK profile generator. The device developed in this research shows that experiments with live organisms or cells are not the only way to generate PK profiles for drugs. The device is intended to “copy” (not predict) the pharmacokinetic profile of a compound for teaching and research purposes.
The newly proposed in vitro pharmacokinetic profile generator can be a practical alternative to using live animals in certain areas of teaching and research. The device is simple, can generate concentration profiles with predefined pharmacokinetic parameters, and is very easy to use. It can be readily scaled to match the pharmacokinetic parameters of any drug and the size of any experimental animal, from as small as a worm to as large as a human, by simply adjusting the pump flow rates and the total volume of fluid in the system. Small devices can be constructed by microfabrication and microfluidics, while larger devices can be constructed by using pumps and tubes of appropriate size and volume. The simple control of drug PK parameters as well as the precision and accuracy of this device make it a valuable in vitro resource for PK studies.
The device is applicable to small drug molecules and biopharmaceuticals and addresses the current need to reduce the use of live animals for pharmaceutical research, both in the industry and academia (pharmacy, medicine, biotechnology). No live cells or enzymes are required for the device to function, although they can be included as an option.
Students and practitioners of pharmacy, nursing, medicine, and biotechnology could use the device to learn how to administer drugs and how to keep the drug concentrations in the therapeutic window under normal and changing pathophysiological conditions. Research scientists and trainees can use the device to practice collecting pharmacokinetic data before working with real laboratory animals. The fluid generated with the device, with naturally changing drug concentrations, could be particularly useful for investigating the influence of predefined variable drug concentration profiles on cell cultures (mammalian, plant, or bacterial).
In addition, the proposed pharmacokinetic profile generator can be used to study artefacts in current pharmacokinetic models [ ] and to test the performance of new analytical methods designed for in vivo monitoring (ability to respond to changing analyte concentration).
The device is meant to be simple, robust, and usable as a desktop instrument in teaching and research laboratories.