Introduction
Process analytical technology (PAT) is a system for designing, analyzing, and controlling manufacturing of pharmaceutical compounds through timely measurements of critical quality and performance attributes of raw and in-process materials and processes with the goal of ensuring final product quality. Following official statements from the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH), a large number of pharmaceutical companies have utilized PAT in drug development and drug production [ , , , ]. Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) is a mature technology for use in a PAT system. It is sensitive to both the chemical and physical characteristics of a sample [ ]. As a PAT tool, NIRS is widely used for end-point detection of pharmaceutical blending processes. A broad range of qualitative and quantitative strategies for detecting end-points of blending have been used [ , , , ]. Quantitative methods allow for more detailed understanding of blend behavior over time.
Preparation of an accurate prediction model is essential for quantitative end-point detection of pharmaceutical blending process. It is necessary to conduct a number of experiments to obtain an accurate correlation between intensity of NIR spectra collected during blending and reference values. A large number of samples must be characterized by reference methods and NIRS during the blending process are often required to develop an accurate prediction model [ , , , ]. After developing a robust calibration model using laboratory-scale data, additional trials at commercial scale are necessary to transfer the analytical method. The necessity of calibration transfer is a function of scale of blending. The change of scale leads to spectral changes, which in turn, cause prediction errors.
Pharmaceutical companies often change the scale and equipment used for blending throughout the lifecycle of a product. Specifically, the Scale - Up and Post Approval Changes (SUPAC) guidance offers companies direct guidance for changing the scale of processes (such as blending) [ ]. SUPAC guidance illustrates the potential to change process scales and types of equipment used for production. However, the effect of these changes on PAT sensors is not always considered and is not part of the SUPAC guidance. As previously stated, NIR data change as a function of blend scale. These changes typically require additional studies using new blenders to update or recalculate new models. This becomes particularly problematic when considering very large blenders requiring substantial amounts of pharmaceutical powders.
This work seeks to characterize and mitigate the spectral differences between different scales of blending. Principal component analysis (PCA) is a well-established method for qualitative analysis of multivariate data across many different fields of research. It is an efficient means of describing the spectral variance that exists in a set of multivariate data. An important use of PCA is characterization of NIR spectra [ , , ]. The loading vectors and scores succinctly summarize the variance in the spectra for qualitative analysis. However, PCA accounts for only the spectral variance in a data set and does not explicitly establish a relationship between stimuli (such as blend scale) and observed variance in spectra.
Two-dimensional (2D) correlation spectroscopy has been applied to a broad range of multivariate analyses [ , ]. It has been demonstrated to be sensitive to the effects on spectra from many different perturbations including temperature change, concentration change, chemical reactions, and crystal phase transitions [ ]. For instance, 2D correlation spectroscopy has been used to understand and explain variations in data from samples experiencing temperature changes [ , ]. Application of 2D correlation spectroscopy has been extended to typical nondestructive PAT sensors including NIRS and Raman spectroscopy [ , ].
Recently, a combination approach of PCA and 2D correlation spectroscopy was applied to pharmaceutical analysis using NIRS. The NIR spectra of water in the different temperature region were analyzed, and detailed spectral variation was revealed by PCA and 2D correlation spectroscopy [ ]. Currently, small NIR spectral variations from different compounds can be discriminated by a combination approach of PCA and 2D correlation spectroscopy [ ].
Pharmaceutical tablet analysis using PCA and 2D correlation spectroscopy has also been reported [ ]. Pharmaceutical tablets prepared by different compression pressures were demonstrated to have different PCA and 2D correlation spectroscopic results. Such analyses are very useful in understanding the changes that occur as pharmaceutical powders are processed into tablets. Specifically, 2D correlation spectroscopy highlights the regions of greatest (and least) covariance with the stimuli causing spectral variance.
In the present work, a technique for generating NIR spectra that match pharmaceutical blends is demonstrated. The spectra are generated by using small amounts of pharmaceutical blends in a die and carefully applying force. PCA and 2D dimensional spectroscopy were used to demonstrate the suitability of this system as a potential tool for calibration. Creation of NIR spectra with absorbance that match those collected from pharmaceutical blends is a potentially valuable means of reducing the cost of developing analytical methods. Also, this technology is expected to be beneficial for post-approval transfer of NIR-based PAT methods between different types of blending equipment.
Material and Methods
Samples and Environmental Conditions
Blends comprised of 50 % (w/w) microcrystalline cellulose (MCC; Avicel PH 101, FMC Biopolymer, Mechanicsburg, PA, USA) and lactose (modified spray-dried; Foremost Farms USA, Rothschild, WI, USA) were manufactured in a 5.5-L bin blender (L.B. Bohle LLC, Warminster, PA, USA) using Delta V (Emerson Process Management, Equipment & Controls, Inc., Lawrence, PA, USA) controls. The blender was operated at 10 rpm for 30 min. All blends in this study were prepared in this manner.
The lid of the 5.5-L bin blender was equipped with a 1.5-cm sapphire window to allow collection of spectra. All data collected in the blender were taken through the same window.
An Instron universal testing system (model 5869; Instron Corporation, Norwood, MA, USA) equipped with a 50-N load cell was used. The primary function in this study was the precise application of small forces [ ].
A die was machined from a block of acetal resin (McMASTER-CARR, Elmhurst, IL, USA) with a 4.8 \( \times \) 5.0 cm cylindrical hole, 5-cm die. A 5.0-cm diameter cylindrical punch machined from acetal resin (McMASTER-CARR, Elmhurst, IL, USA) was connected to the Instron load cell using an aluminum rod with 0.6-cm diameter. A second die and punch were similarly constructed with a 5 × 2 cm diameter hole, 2-cm die.
Spectra Collection Using the 2-cm Die
Regions of the NIR spectra with maximum correlation to the applied force were identified using the 2-cm die. Samples from the powder blend of 4 g were placed in the 2-cm die and compressed using a Carver Automatic Tablet Press (Model 3887.1SD0A00, Wabash, IN, USA) with 907, 1361, 1814, and 2268-kg forces. After creation of the compacts, the die with a compact still inside was set on the blender window and NIR data collection was performed.
Near-infrared reflectance measurements were conducted using a wired-, portable-NIR spectrometer (MicroNIR 1700 spectrometer, JDS Uniphase Corporation, Milpitas, CA, USA). The illumination source is two integrated vacuum tungsten lamps, and detector is a 128-pixel uncooled InGaAs photodiode array. NIR spectra were collected over the wavelength range of 950–1650 with 6.2-nm resolution in reflectance mode. Before obtaining NIR spectra of samples, a calibrated 99 % reflectance standard (Labsphere Inc., North Sutton, NH, USA) was used as white reference and internal standard from the spectrometer was used as dark reference. The number of scans for each spectrum was 100; three NIR spectra were averaged for each sample. The MicroNIR 1700 spectrometer was used for all studies conducted in this work.
Spectra Collection Using the 5-cm Die
The empty 5-cm die was placed on the window (mounted in the lid) of the 5.5-L bin blender. Powder blends were used to fill the die for NIR data collection. The maximum volume for this die is 376.8 cm 3 . The bulk densities for the constituents of the blend were 2.70 and 1.57 cm 3 /g for MCC and lactose, respectively. Thus, the maximum weight of blends filled in a 5.0-cm diameter die was estimated as 46.0 g. NIR spectra in the die were obtained using 26.0, 36.0, and 46.0-g samples of the powder prepared as previously described.
The schematic layout of Instron system is illustrated in Fig. 1 . The 5-cm die was fixed to a plate that was mounted on the lower platen of the Instron testing station; powder blend was then placed in the die. NIR data were collected, without any force, with 26.0, 36.0, and 46.0 g of powder using JDSU NIR spectrometer. Note that the data without any force were collected before experiments giving forces to samples in the same day, taking into account day by day variability of the NIR spectrometer. Instron studies with different forces were then performed using same 26.0, 36.0, and 46.0-g quantities of powder in the 5-cm die. The different forces applied to the punch are summarized in Table 1 . An illustration of the overall system is shown in Fig. 2 . Fig. 1 Schematic layout of 5-cm die system Table 1 Summary of conditions for application of force from the Instron testing system Instron force conditions, pressure ( N ) Filled weight (g) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 26 0.42 0.75 1.20 3.13 5.53 10.16 16.50 – – 36 0.38 0.67 1.05 2.13 3.24 4.04 5.46 10.64 16.01 46 0.25 0.57 0.98 2.17 3.07 4.05 5.36 10.06 16.00 Fig. 2 Overall system for applying controlled forces; inset is a view from below the 5-cm die. Components of the system include a upper load cell, b 5-cm punch, c 5-cm die, d support frame, and e MicroNIR spectrometer
Near-infrared reflectance measurements were conducted through the window of the blender on material in the die (see Fig. 1 ). Data for this study were collected directly from the blender lid. Note that these data were collected using the blender lid (and 5-cm die) mounted in the Instron testing station as an off-line experiment. Data were collected in this manner to maintain consistency of NIR spectra acquisition conditions between in a die and in a blender.
Spectra Collection Using the Bin Blender
The assembled 5.5-L bin blender was filled to 40, 60, and 80 % of capacity (by volume), and NIR spectra of blends were collected. The blends were filled from the exit side of the blender as illustrated in Fig. 3 . For these studies, the spectrometer window was in a horizontal position facing downwards (upside down). After obtaining NIR spectra at different filled volumes, 10-rpm rotations for 30 min were conducted with the 60 % fill. Spectra were collected from the blends before and after rotating the blender. Fig. 3 Assembled bin blender illustrating the direction of fill and orientation of spectrometer
Modeling and Analysis
Unscrambler (Camo Process AS, Nedre Vollgate, Norway; version 10.3) was used for NIR spectroscopic analysis in this study. Also, the Unscrambler was used for calculating Hotelling’s T 2 ellipses using NIR spectra data.
All of the 2D correlation spectra analyses were performed using the 2D-Shige software written by Shigeyuki Morita ( https://sites.google.com/site/shigemorita/home/2dshige/ ). The 2D correlation spectra results were used for identifying NIR spectra regions with optimum correlation to the applied force perturbations and subsequent density changes in the 5-cm die and in the bin blender. Principle component analysis (PCA) results were used to illustrate the spectral variances of powder blends collected under different conditions.
Fault detection for new spectra based on a model using Hotelling’s T 2 is a well-known technique in process control industries [ ]. In the present work, Hotelling’s T 2 ellipse was used for visualization of projecting data into different spaces after calculating PCA models. The Hotelling’s T 2 ellipse was plotted in scores space; and the critical limit is adjusted by varying the p values. These limits indicate the degree to which of the projected samples fit the model. In this study, the p value for the critical limit was set at 5 %. If the proportion of rejected samples is larger than the chosen p value, one may conclude that there is a difference between the original samples and the projected samples as a whole. Similarity of NIR spectra collected in a die and in a blender was estimated using Hotelling’s T 2 ellipse. Comparison of the projection variance curve to the calibration and validation curves was conducted.
Results and Discussion
NIR Spectra in the 2-cm Die
NIR spectra of blends compressed in the 2-cm die are illustrated in Fig. 4 , and 2D correlation spectroscopic results are shown in Fig. 5a and b as synchronous and asynchronous relationships, respectively. The 1400–1600-nm regions demonstrated a strong synchronous relationship with compression force. The increase in pressure caused an increase in absorbance in this wavelength region. This may be explained by the increase in the packing density. The spectra of blends, comprised of 50 % cellulose, demonstrate clear O-H stretching modes of molecular vibrations associated with polymer structure of cellulose [ ]. These are main sources of NIR spectra change in 1400–1600-nm regions following increase of compression force. Fig. 4 Differences of NIR absorbance spectra of tablets using the 2-cm die at different compression forces Fig. 5 2D correlation spectroscopic results of tablets using the 2-cm die at different compression forces, a a synchronous relationship and b an asynchronous relationship
The 2-cm die studies indicate that the 1400–1600-nm regions have a definite correlation with changes in density. Note that this region of high correlation was identified within the wavelength limits of the data collected (950–1650 nm).
NIR Spectra in the 5-cm Die
The NIR reflectance spectra of blends in a 5-cm die and those collected from the blender are illustrated in Fig. 6 . The blends in the die have higher NIR absorbance than those in the blender. Spectra after first derivative Savitzky-Golay (SG) pre-processing are illustrated in Fig. 7 . There is a clear difference in absorbance in the 1400–1600 nm regions between the two sets of pre-processed data. This illustrates that application of SG first derivative pre-processing of NIR spectra of blends in the 5-cm die did not mitigate the differences brought about by collecting data from powder in the blender. Fig. 6 NIR absorbance spectra of powder collected in the 5-cm die and in the bin blender Fig. 7 First derivative NIR spectra of powder collected in the 5-cm die and in the bin blender
NIR Spectra in the Bin Blender
Figure 8 shows a schematic diagram of MicroNIR 1700 spectrometer on the sapphire window. After adding powder to the blender, the powder height was checked and fill volume was calculated. The volume of the powder decreased after blending (as noted in Table 2 ); this is consistent with the observation that the NIR absorbance of blends increased after 30 min of blending. Fig. 8 Schematic layout of a blender Table 2 Summary of conditions for experiments conducted in the bin blender and in the 5-cm die Filled level (%) Filled weight (g) Filled volume (cm 3 ) Averaged density (g/cm 3 ) In the blender 40 1106.6 3140 0.35 60 (before rotation) 1659.9 4082 0.41 60 (after rotation) 1659.9 3768 0.44 80 2213.2 4867 0.45 In the 5-cm die 58 26 55.0 0.47 88 36 82.4 0.44 100 46 94.2 0.49
The 2D correlation spectroscopic results using NIR absorbance of blends with different powder heights in the blender are illustrated in Fig. 9a and b as synchronous and asynchronous relationships, respectively. Consistent with the 5-cm die results, the 1400–1600-nm regions demonstrated a strong synchronous relationship with heights of blends in a blender. Fig. 9 2D correlation spectroscopic results of blends with different filled volume and different height from the bottom of blender to the top, a a synchronous relationship and b an asynchronous relationship
A small change in the density of the powder bed was observed after blending (see Table 2 ). The change in density is expected to occur in similar blends. Thus, for quantitative predictions of end-points, it is important to account for the density change that occurs within a given blend (not just between blend scales).
Differences Between NIR Spectra in the 5-cm Die and Those in the Blender
The 5-cm die was used to create a set of samples that mimic the conditions in a blender. Here, the scope was to match spectra collected in a 5.5-L blender. Presumably, the conditions could be expanded to allow method development for larger scale blenders. The primary means of simulating these conditions is through changing the density of the powder bed. Table 2 summarizes the densities in the bin blender and the 5-cm die; for calculations of density, it is assumed that the powder is equally distributed throughout the blender.
Estimated averaged densities for all blends in the 5-cm die and in the blender were similar, as illustrated in Table 2 . The density of the samples from the blender (60 % fill, after 30 min of rotation) and that of the 88 % fill in the 5-cm die were quite similar. However, their NIR absorbance was different as shown in Fig. 10 . The NIR absorbance of the sample in the 5-cm die was higher than that of the sample in the bin blender. These results demonstrate that NIR spectra in the blender do not match those in the 5-cm die if adjusted only for averaged density. Fig. 10 NIR absorbance spectra of blends with the same averaged density collected in the 5-cm die and in the bin blender
NIR Spectra in the 5-cm Die with Applied Force
NIR spectra changes during Instron experiments using 26, 36, and 46-g blends were shown in Fig. 11 , (a) 26, (b) 36, and (c) 46 g filled, respectively. Absorbance in the NIR of blends in the 5-cm die during the Instron experiments decreased with an increase in force, as illustrated in Table 1 . This phenomenon was contrary to that of increasing NIR absorbance concomitant with an increase in density due to rotations of the bin blender. After applying specific forces to the 5-cm die (Instron experiments), height changes of blends were measured for 26, 36, and 46 g experiments, respectively. Density changes of blends for 26, 36, and 46 g experiments in the 5-cm die were small due to the relatively small displacement brought about by the applied force. This indicates that blends in the 5-cm die through Instron experiments were less compacted than those after 30-min rotations in a blender. It also indicates that the primary source of change in the 5-cm die experiment was the packing density of powders. It is expected that particle breakage and deformation would be minimal, given the magnitude of force applied. This phenomenon was quite different from that occurred during compaction in the 2-cm die. During compaction, particle breakage and deformation occurs and NIR absorption increases as illustrated in Fig. 4 . A decrease of NIR absorption in the die from the application of force mitigated the differences between NIR spectra in the 5-cm die and in the blender. Fig. 11 NIR absorbance spectra of blends from the Instron studies in the 5-cm die using a 26, b 36, and c 46 g of powder
Matching NIR Absorbance of Powders in the Blender and the 5-cm Die
The ultimate goal of this work is to create spectral variance in a set of samples such that the variance is similar to that of the process of blending and the scale of blending. The variance in the samples is created by changing the amount of powder in the 5-cm die and the density of the powder in the die. Force was applied to the punch of the 5-cm die to further enhance the spectral variance of the data collected. The magnitude of force applied to the powder in the die was 0.25–16.5 N as described in Table 1 . A PCA model was calculated from data collected from 26 g of powder placed in the 5-cm die before and during Instron studies. Following the calculation of the 26-g model, PCA models were calculated from data collected from 36 and 46 g of powder in the 5-cm die. From these models, a Hotelling’s T 2 ellipse was calculated in scores space using the first and second principle components. Data collected from powder placed in the blender before and after 30-min blending were projected onto the PCA model, and the results are illustrated in Fig. 12a–c . Note that the spectral variance of data collected in the 5-cm die using 26 g of powder was dissimilar from the data collected from powders in the bin blender. These results show that only force applied to the powder of a single volume in the die is not sufficient to get matched spectra in the bin blender. Fig. 12 Hotelling’s T 2 ellipse results from a PCA model created by using different weights of blends in the 5-cm die, a 26, b 36, and c 46 g. Blue data points represent the spectra before and during Instron studies at a single fill level, and green data points represent spectra in the blender before and after rotation. For a , NIR absorbance spectra in the die filled of 36 and 46-g blends were projected into the 26-g model as additional ( green ) data points
On the other hand, absorbance data from all samples with different fill volumes and forces in the die were used to calculate another PCA model. This model was built using NIR data collected under each of the conditions described in Table 1 . Again, a Hotelling’s T 2 ellipse was calculated in scores space using the first and second principle components and the bin blender data before and after 30 min blending were projected onto this space (see Fig. 13 ). Fig. 13 Hotelling’s T 2 ellipse results using PCA model created by using different weights and forces in the 5-cm die. Blue data points represent spectra in the 5-cm die, and green data points represent spectra in the blender before and after rotation
Using NIR absorbance of blends with different heights in the 5-cm die and different applied forces allowed the creation of a data set that spanned the variance observed in the small-scale (5.5 L) blender. Thus, a small amount of material (a total of 108 g) was effectively able to simulate the spectral variance of NIR absorbance data observed in the bin blender.
The method described in this work demonstrates that the use of a relatively small amount of material combined with the small, precise forces applied by the Instron testing system is effectively able to match the spectral variance observed in NIR absorbance data collected from the same powder in a bin blender. This novel approach is expected to facilitate development of blend end-point detection methods by greatly reducing the amount of raw materials necessary to develop a method robust to scale. It is anticipated that this method may encourage pharmaceutical companies to more routinely develop blend monitoring methods for many different products.
Conclusions
Use of nondestructive NIRS as a PAT tool is becoming increasingly necessary and indispensable for pharmaceutical production. However, large amounts of raw materials (API, in particular) are typically not available during process development. In this work, we specifically address the need to develop end-point detection method of a pharmaceutical blending process with minimal quantities of materials.
The results obtained from 2D correlation spectroscopic indicate that absorbance in the NIR region of 1400–1600 nm is sensitive to the state of the powder from which the data is collected. Specifically, significant differences exist between data collected in a die, as loose powder and in a bin blender. Further, this region also demonstrates a change in absorbance as a function of blending.
Our approach illustrates that the ability match the spectral variance of NIR absorption between the powders placed in a die and compressed with that of data collected in a bin blender. This novel technique is well suited for industrial applications as it dramatically reduces the amount of raw materials used for NIRS method development. Matching the spectral variance between powders in a blender and in a die is an expedient means of obtaining representative spectra using only small quantities of raw materials.
We envision this technique as a means of establishing the spectral variance associated with changes of scale to the analytical method. Once this variance space has been included in a calibration, it is suggested that future applications of the calibration will be robust to changes in scale.