INTRODUCTION
Clonidine hydrochloride (CH) is an α-receptor agonist with anti-hypertensive and pain-relief actions [ ]. Ideal anti-hypertension drugs produce stable blood pressure. The sustained release dosage forms of these drugs are preferred, such as nifedipine extended release tablets (ADALAT® CC) and metoprolol sustained-release tablets (Betocloc®). However, some people may occasionally forget dosing, leading to unstable blood pressure.
Recently, CH was approved for therapy of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) that is one of the most common neurobehavioral problems mainly affecting the children and young adults aged between 6 and 17 years of age with a high morbidity ranging from 2 to 18% in USA. Children and adults suffering from ADHD have impulsive behavior and weak ability to process information. They might have low scores on tests and even drop out of school. In addition, traffic accidents and spontaneous sexual encounters may be related to ADHD [ ]. In October 2010, a sustained-release tablet of CH (Kapvay®) was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of USA [ ]. Oral administration of drugs is the most popular approach, although the patients with swallowing difficulty (dysphagia) have to seek other routes [ ]. Furthermore, both children and elders may exhibit poor compliance with oral or injection administration of drugs. Treatment of many diseases requires stable drug concentrations in the body. To reach this aim, traditional dosage forms such as tablets and injections need to be administrated many times daily. Even if the extended-release formulations of these drugs are used, at least once-daily oral administration is needed.
Three-dimensional (3D) printing is an emerging technology that has been widely applied in engineering, manufacturing, art, education, and medicine [ ]. 3D printing is actually an additive manufacturing approach, involving fused deposition modeling (FDM), stereolithography (SLA), selective laser sintering (SLS), selective laser melting (SLM), direct metal laser sintering (DMLS), pressure-assisted microsyringe (PAM) and drop on solid deposition (DOS), semi-solid extrusion (SSE) [ , , , ]. FDM is a typical 3D printing method, where an appropriate filament is pushed out through a hot nozzle of a 3D printer to form an architecture designed using computer software ( e.g. , Computer Aided Design, CAD) in advance [ ]. This method is widely applied due to its low-cost and convenient process [ , ], and it can produce a variety of drug delivery devices [ ]. Hot-melt extrusion (HME) is commonly used in conjunction with FDM to produce filaments that may be materials alone or the mixture of materials/drugs [ ]. Co-participation of the pharmaceutical industry and compounding pharmacies may become the best way to turn this technology into reality [ ]. 3D printing is rapid and flexible, improving the development of personalized devices, where on-demand and on-site production of customizable products can meet patient-specific needs [ ]. Clinical applications of 3D printing are also focused on, involving 3D-printed prosthetics, skeleton, and tubular organs [ ]. For example, an 83-year-old Belgian female was assisted with a new 3D-printed mandible that had no influence on her speaking and eating [ ]. The technology is applied to high-resolution printing in resin and restorative dentistry [ ]. Recently, 3D printing technologies are applied to prepare combined drug-devices, such as progesterone-loaded vaginal rings [ ], riboflavin gastric floating tablet-in-device [ ], salicylic acid-loaded anti-acne personalized nasal masks [ ], anti-inflammatory indomethacin-loaded intrauterine devices [ ], and clobetasol propionate-loaded mouth guards [ ]. The advantages of 3D printing technologies are well known for preparation of various devices, involving shapes, doses, and mechanical properties. 3D printing may be applied to the different phases of drug development to improve pharmaceutical manufacturing [ ]. Therefore, the advantages of 3D printing for pharmaceutical devices with complex structures are more obvious. More importantly, the device can be combined with drugs and achieve controlled release by modifying the formulation of devices [ , ]. Orthodontic retainers are a wearable customizable medical device that is usually applied to dental protection or alignment [ , ]. Here, CH was integrated in a traditional oral device, i.e. , an orthodontic retainer, by the HME and FDM 3D printing methods with poly(lactic acid) (PLA) and polycaprolactone (PCL) as the matrix. Studies on tooth mold preparation, traditional orthodontic retainer preparation, orthodontic retainer 3D scanning, preparation of CH-loaded filaments, and 3D printing of CH-loaded orthodontic retainers were conducted. The release of CH from orthodontic retainers and the simulation of in vivo drug concentration-time profiles were explored. An ideal personalized CH-loaded orthodontic retainer was finally obtained with the sustained release of more than 3 days.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Poly(lactic acid) (PLA, 2002D; glass transition temperature, 63.2°C; melt point, 171°C; MW, 10,000 Da) was a product of NatureWorks (USA). Polycaprolactone (PCL, 6800; MW, 80,000; melt point, 58–60°C) was prepared by Solvay (USA). Polyethylene glycol (PEG) 4000 and Tween 80 were purchased from Tinjin Tiantai Fine Chemical Co., Ltd. (China) and Jiangsu Chenpai Pharmaceutical Group Corp. (China), respectively. CH was purchased from Wuhan Dongkangyuan Technology Co., Ltd. (China). Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC, K15 M) was provided by Shanghai Colorcon Coating Technology Co., Ltd., China. Ethylcellulose (EC, HT-10) was provided by Huzhou Zhanwang Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., China. Other reagents were of analytic grade. Pure water prepared with the Heal Force Pure Water System was always used.
Methods
Preparation of CH-Loaded Filaments
CH-loaded filaments were prepared as our previous research with modification [ ]. The 100-mesh powders of CH and PEG 4000 were mixed and then heated with water bath at 70°C to obtain a homogeneous suspension. The proportion of PLA/PCL in the filament had been screened in our previous research [ ]. An 8:2 ( w / w ) ratio of PLA/PCL was chosen because the mixture showed the proper mechanical property. The particles of PLA and PCL (8:2, w / w ) were added into the above hot suspension that adhered on the surfaces of the particles. The system was cooled and agitated at room temperature. Tween 80 was added into the system and mixed thoroughly. The final weight proportions of CH, PEG 4000, Tween 80, and the mixture of PLA/PCL in the system were 1%, 10%, 3%, and 86%, respectively. The system was fed into the hopper of a desktop single-screw filament extruder (Wellzoom B, Shenzhen Mistar Technology Co., Ltd., China). A 1.75-mm-diameter white-like filament was extruded at 190°C with a screw speed of 5 rpm. Blank filaments were prepared as above without addition of drugs.
Establishment of Orthodontic Retainer 3D Scanning Files
The retainer (6.80 cm long, 4.90 cm wide, 1.40 cm high) was suitable for the upper teeth of a female 25-year-old volunteer who is one of the co-authors (H. Jiang), and prepared with a traditional standard protocol in the Department of Somatology, 307 Hospital of People’s Liberation Army of China. The orthodontic retainer was coated with a white film to obtain a surface with diffuse reflection. The morphological file of the orthodontic retainer was obtained in a stereolithography (.stl) file format after the orthodontic retainer was 3D-scanned with a blue 3D scanner (NANKE3DB, Shenzhen Nanke 3D Technology Company Limited., China). A 3D model of the orthodontic retainer was obtained with the equal shape and volume to the 3D scanning data. The stl file was converted to the gcode format recognized by the 3D printer.
3D Printing of Retainers by the FDM Method
CH-loaded retainers were 3D printed using the above filaments on an FDM 3D printer ( CF -12410B, Manli Technology Group Ltd., Hong Kong, China). The object of 3D printing was set to the equal size to the 3D model. The printing parameters were set as follows: a nozzle of 0.4-mm diameter at 190°C, the hot bed temperature of 60°C, and an extruding speed of 18 mm/s. A raft structure was printed at the bottom before an orthodontic retainer was printed with the crown part at the top according to the corresponding file. The raft kept the 3D printing process stable and was finally removed by hand to obtain an original retainer that had the layer thickness of about 0.13 mm. A caliper was used to measure the thickness of retainer shells at the left, middle, and right positions to obtain the mean thickness of shells. The retainers were weighed. The volunteer wore the orthodontic retainer to judge whether it was fit. Blank retainers were also prepared using the blank filaments as above.
Measurement of Mechanical Property of Orthodontic Retainers
An orthodontic retainer was put into the measurement cavity of a YPD-3000 tablet hardness tester (Shanghai Huanghai Pharmaceutical Inspection Instrument Co., Ltd., China) at its left, middle, and right positions, respectively. The retainer was gradually squeezed by pushing the barriers. The hardness was recorded when the orthodontic retainer ruptured.
Thermal Analysis
Both thermal gravity analysis (TGA) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) were performed on the DTG-60 thermal analyzer (Shimadzu, Japan). Blank or CH-loaded retainers were scratched with a sharp blade to obtain some powders that were dried under vacuum at 40°C for 24 h before thermal analysis. An aliquot (5 mg) of the dry powders was heated from 40 to 500°C at a heating rate of 10°C/min under the protection of nitrogen. CH powders were also measured as above.
X-Ray Diffraction Measurement
The X-ray powder diffraction of retainers was measured on an X-ray powder diffractometer (D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany). The powders of retainers were prepared as above and put into the diffractometer. The measurement parameters of X-ray diffraction (XRD) were set as follows: Cu as the target, X-ray wavelength λ of 1.5418 Å, electric voltage of 60 kV, electric current of 80 mA, and scanning angles (2θ) from 3° to 60° with the stepwise of 0.02° at a speed of 5°/min.
Coating of 3D-Printed Retainers
A viscous HPMC aqueous solution and an EC solution in ethanol were separately prepared, and they were mixed under thorough agitation to obtain an aqueous suspension with the HPMC/EC ratio of 2:1 ( w / w ). The ratio was selected because HPMC can be rapidly dissolved in aqueous solutions but EC did not be dissolved. The suspension was put into a handheld sprayer and evenly sprayed on the surfaces of original retainers with the help of an air compression instrument. The coating layers were dried using a hair dryer. The coating and drying process was repeated several times until the retainer had 5–6% weight gain. Finally, the coated retainers were completely dried under vacuum at 40°C for 12 h.
Washing of 3D-Printed Retainers
CH-loaded original retainers were put into a conical flask filled with phosphate-buffered solutions (PBS, pH 6.8, 100 mL) and sealed. The flask was oscillated in a thermostatic air oscillator at 37°C and 150 rpm. Four hours later, the retainers were withdrawn and thoroughly washed with fresh PBS. The clean orthodontic retainers were dried under vacuum at 40°C for 12 h to obtain the washed retainers.
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was conducted for observation of CH powders (100 mesh), the surfaces and cross-sections of blank filaments, CH-loaded filaments, and CH-loaded retainers (including original, coated, and washed retainers before dissolution and 72 h post-dissolution). Their cross-sections were made using a sharp blade. They were adhered to conductive tapes and coated with gold powders before observation under a scanning electron microscope (S4800, Hitachi, Japan).
Determination of CH in Retainers
Pieces of the retainers were cut off at various sites, which were thoroughly crushed using a sharp blade to form powders. An aliquot (0.1 g) of powders was weighed and dissolved in dichloromethane (2 mL) and diluted with methanol to 100 mL. The solution was processed by bath ultrasound for 3 min to completely dissolve CH and then filtrated through a 0.45-μm membrane. CH in the filtrates was determined using the HPLC on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system (USA) under the following conditions: a Diamonsil C18 column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm) maintained at 25°C, the injected volume of 10 μL, a mobile phase of acetonitrile/0.1% phosphoric acid solution (10:90, v / v ) at a flow rate of 1 mL/min, and a UV detection wavelength of 210 nm. All the measurements were performed in triplicate.
Release of CH from Retainers
An orthodontic retainer was immersed in PBS (pH 6.8, 100 mL) and sealed in a bottle that was oscillated in a THZ-D Thermostatic Oscillator (Taicang, China) at 37°C and 150 rpm [ ]. An aliquot (2 mL) of dissolution media was withdrawn at the predetermined time points up to 72 h, and fresh PBS was supplemented. The withdrawn solutions were filtered through 0.45-μm filters. CH in the filtrate was determined by the HPLC method as mentioned above. The released CH amount was calculated, involving three types of retainers, i.e. , original, coated, and washed retainers.
Drug Release Kinetics
The basic materials of retainers are insoluble in water. CH could release from the retainers via the surface pores and inner channels. Therefore, Higuchi equation, i.e. , diffusion-controlled release kinetics, fits CH release from the orthodontic retainer, which is expressed by Eq. [ ] [ ]:
\( {M}_t=k\sqrt{t} \) [ ]where M t is the cumulative amount of drugs released, k is a constant parameter, and t is the dissolution time.
Simulation In Vivo Drug Profiles of CH-Loaded Retainers
Physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling (PBPK) of CH was developed using Gastroplus® (Simulations Plus, Inc.). Model parameters used in the PBPK model were collected from the literature [ , ]. The physiochemical parameters not available in the literature were predicted using the ADMET Predictor™. The clinical data for CH was collected from the clinical studies published in the literature which included the mean concentration-time profiles after both oral and intravenous (i.v.) administration [ ]. The Advanced Compartmental Absorption and Transit (ACATTM) and PBPK Plus™ were used for the simulation of CH after i.v. and oral administration. The simulated pharmacokinetic (PK) profiles of CH were compared with the observed profiles for evaluation of the model performance. The model was then used to simulate PK profiles after dosing the sustained-release formulations by incorporating the in vitro dissolution data of the retainers into the model.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Personalized Design and Preparation of 3D-Printed Orthodontic Retainers
Everyone has her/his unique tooth morphology. We applied the traditional tooth mold preparation method to make the transparent orthodontic retainer fit for the upper teeth of one volunteer (Fig. 1a, b ). The molded orthodontic retainer was suitable for the volunteer after wearing (Fig. 1c ). However, it had the remarkable specular reflection (Fig. 1b ), so a coating film had to be used to cover the surface of the molded orthodontic retainer to get diffuse reflection ready for 3D scanning with the primitive size (Fig. 1d ). A 3D file was provided by the company and the computer image is shown in Fig. 1e . The 3D-printed orthodontic retainer was obtained with almost the same size and morphology as the molded orthodontic retainer (Fig. 1f ). The white appearance of this orthodontic retainer was mainly ascribed to white PLA and PCL. The wearable personalized 3D-printed orthodontic retainer was suitable for the volunteer (Fig. 1g ). The CH-loaded orthodontic retainer can be dosed or stopped quickly as required besides its retainer function. Traditional retainers are only prepared in the hospital, and the customers cannot select to add some drugs in it. However, 3D-printed retainers can be prepared home or in a lab so that the customers can select to add the drugs they need. Fig. 1 Design and preparation process of 3D printed orthodontic retainers. a Appearance of the upper teeth of the volunteer. b The molded orthodontic retainer prepared by the traditional method. c The worn molded orthodontic retainer by the same volunteer. d The film-coated molded orthodontic retainer. e The computer image of the orthodontic retainer. f The CH-loaded 3D-printed original retainer. g The worn 3D-printed orthodontic retainer by the same volunteer. The scales in graphs E and F are the same as that in graph D
Intramouthly direct 3D scanning may not reveal the details of one’s teeth due to the limited space in the mouth. Therefore, we used the reliable traditional orthodontic retainer preparation method to obtain the molded orthodontic retainer of the volunteer. The molded orthodontic retainer can be well scanned in details using the 3D scanning facility in the company after eliminating the specular reflection. The well-established 3D orthodontic retainer file can be used repeatedly for the preparation of drug-loaded orthodontic retainers according to the needs of therapy, involving different types of drugs, doses, and release speeds.
The FDM method was chosen for preparation of the orthodontic retainer due to its convenience and available biocompatible materials. FDM is affordable, easy to operate, and shows high printing accuracy and reproducibility [ ]. SLA is not preferred for preparation of retainers because photopolymerizable materials are used, such as polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGDA) that may leave monomers and solvent residues to lead to unexpected toxicity to the mouth mucosa [ , ]. Moreover, in our preliminary experiment, PEGDA was tried to prepare the retainer, although it was apparently not appropriate due to its rigid property. The SLS method is an industrial 3DP technology that uses a powder bed to build up the 3D object. SLS uses a laser to bind the powder particles together. However, there are very limited available pharmaceutical excipients and APIs, which are suitable for SLS without degradation at high energy levels. Absorbent excipients are needed to enhance energy absorption from the laser and allow printability, such as Candurin® Gold Sheen [ ]. Therefore, the SLS method was also excluded.
Supports are usually used in FDM 3D printing to prevent the transformation of 3D-printed hollow matter [ ]. However, we found that the whole structure of retainers was destroyed when the supports were removed by cutting. Therefore, an unsupported 3D printing orthodontic retainer was prepared but a large raft was used, which was easily removed without any damage to the whole structure.
Characteristics of Orthodontic Retainers
The mean thickness of retainer shells was 1.34 ± 0.05 mm and the weight of one retainer was about 3.2 g. The orthodontic retainers had good mechanical property to resist high compression. The hardness at the left, middle, and right positions was 12.88 ± 1.68, 15.96 ± 1.36, and 12.18 ± 1.44 kgf ( n = 3), respectively. This hardness is a high value in comparison with the common hardness (about 4–6 kgf) of traditional compressed tablets. The percentage of CH in the retainer was 0.83 ± 0.06%.
The DTA graph of CH powders exhibited a large thermal absorption peak at 309°C that was close to the reported melting point (Fig. 2a ) [ ]. The blank retainer, i.e. , the polymer mixture, had two thermal absorption peaks at 58°C and 147°C that were attributed to the glass transition of PCL and PLA, respectively. At the high temperature more than 200°C, multiple irregular thermal absorption peaks appeared, which was ascribed to decomposition of the polymers. Moreover, there was a small tip in the DTA graph of the CH-loaded retainer at 306°C besides the two peaks attributed to the polymer mixture and this temperature was similar to the melting point of CH though the thermal absorption of the polymers affected the profile. Therefore, the crystalline state of CH could be maintained in the retainer. The XRD graphs showed the same result as the thermal analysis because the CH-loaded retainer showed the similar small peaks to those of CH powders but the blank retainer had none (Fig. 1c ). No TGA graphs of the samples showed any peaks below 200°C (Fig. 2b ). Because the filaments and retainers were produced below 200°C, i.e. , 190°C, all the components in the orthodontic retainer remained stable in the whole HME and 3D printing process. Fig. 2 DTA ( a ), TGA ( b ), and XRD ( c ) graphs of CH, blank, and CH-loaded orthodontic retainers. The blue frames in graph ( c ) indicate the differences between the three materials
Long-Term Sustained Release of CH from Retainers
The human body is sensitive to CH that is regarded as safe within a recommended oral daily dose less than 0.4 mg [ ]. Severe adverse reactions would likely happen when a higher daily dose than 0.4 mg is used [ ]. However, current ordinary CH tablets may produce a burst release in the early stage after oral administration, leading to a high drug concentration in the circulation. Therefore, the sustained-release dosage forms of CH, such as the sustained-release tablet of CH (Kapvay®), are focused on [ ]. In this study, wearable personalized CH-loaded retainers were designed and their drug release profiles were the key to screening the optimal formulation.
The three types of orthodontic retainers, i.e. , original, coated, and washed retainers, showed different CH release profiles in PBS (Fig. 3a ). Both the original and coated retainers had the significant burst drug release in the early stage because CH was freely soluble in water, and the retainers had a large surface area. The original retainers had drug burst release with a cumulative CH release amount of 0.44 mg at 5 min post-dissolution and 1.24 mg at 24 h. The coated retainers had a CH release amount of 0.43 mg at 0.5 h and 0.89 mg at 24 h. These values are much higher than at the recommended CH daily dose of 0.4 mg [ ]. Although both the original and coated retainers had a remarkable decrease of drug release rates in the next days (Fig. 3b ), possible severe adverse reactions were inevitable on the first day. Therefore, the coating method was not an optimal solution to the innate burst release problem of original retainers. The drug release blocking ability of HPMC/EC films was not satisfied. Moreover, the residual HPMC/EC layers could prevent the release of CH from the inner space of retainers, leading to a very low drug release rate in the late stage (Fig. 3b ). Fig. 3 CH release profiles ( a ) and release rate profiles ( b ) of 3D-printed retainers
Washed retainers were a new design on the basis of the above unsuccessful strategies. The basic consideration was to wash out the surface CH that was regarded as the burst release resource. Moreover, the time for washing was referred to the burst release time of original retainers, i.e. , 4 h. The percentage of CH in the retainer was 0.83%. A retainer of about 3.2 g contained 27 mg of CH. According to the dissolution data, the CH-loaded original retainer had the burst release within 5 h and 0.979 mg of drugs was released. The washed retainer was obtained by washing the original retainer for 4 h. Therefore, the possible washed-out drugs were 0.979/27 = 3.6% of the total drugs, which meant about 96% of drugs were reserved in the washed retainer. The original CH-loaded retainer had a large drug release to 1.24 mg on the first day, which was much higher than the optimal amount, i.e. , 0.4 mg within 24 h [ ]. The burst release at 4 h was about 0.8 mg (Fig. 3a ) and the release profile was mild post-4 h. Therefore, the 4-h point was chosen to wash the retainer. Fortunately, the washed retainers always exhibited sustained release in the dissolution field (Fig. 3a ). Optimal cumulative CH release was achieved with 0.26 mg at 12 h post-dissolution and 0.42 mg at 24 h, which was basically in the recommended range. After 24 h, the apparent zero-order release of CH from the washed retainers was achieved at a rate of about 10 μg/h and a daily dose of about 0.24 mg. Moreover, in the late stage of dissolution, the release rates of the washed retainers were almost the same as those of the original ones. Therefore, the strategy of washing orthodontic retainers was appropriate. More evidences of the above conclusions were provided in the next characterization of retainers in the different stages of dissolution.
Release Mechanism of CH-Loaded Retainers
The CH release profiles of the three types of orthodontic retainers were simulated in the whole dissolution process based on the Higuchi equation. The different correlation indexes of 0.9297, 0.8836, and 0.9944 were made available for the original, coated, and washed retainers, respectively. Therefore, the washed retainers mainly expressed a Fick’s diffusion mechanism, although the other retainers might not have shown this mechanism in the whole process. We excluded the burst release part, and the remaining profiles (5–72 h) of the original and coated retainers were simulated based on the Higuchi equation. The high correlation indexes of 0.9967 and 0.9936 were obtained for the original and coated retainers, suggesting Fick’s diffusion. Moreover, the original and washed retainers almost showed the same release rates from 12 h (Fig. 3b ). Therefore, the washing of retainers is actually to remove the burst-released CH from the surface so that the whole release profiles of washed retainers are similar to the late release profiles of original retainers. The coated retainers also showed stable release in the late stage but lower than those of original and washed retainers. This is probably ascribed to the blocking effect of the coated insoluble EC films and the viscous dissolution media due to dissolving of HPMC K15 M [ ].
Coating is a usually applied method to enhance sustained release of drugs [ ]. Here, we began by trying the coating of HPMC/EC that was the commonly used sustained release coating materials [ , , , ]. However, the coating of retainers failed to produce sustained release, though a little slow initial release was achieved compared to original retainers (Fig. 3a ), which was possibly attributed to the high water solubility of HPMC and CH. We carefully analyzed the release profiles of original retainers and found the release rates were much slower in the late stage than in the early stage. What happened if the surface CH in the retainer was washed out? The onset of slow release in the release profile of original retainers was selected, i.e. , 4 h post-dissolution. Fortunately, an ideal release of the washed retainer was achieved. The detailed mechanisms of burst and slow release are shown in the next section. The release means and profiles are regular though the SDs seem large, which may be related to the instrumental error and individual difference. However, we notice the SDs from the washed retainer are small, indicating the advantage of the washing process. If this 3D-printed retainer is developed for clinical application in future, the detailed modification is done and one possible advanced FDM printer is used to make the release profiles uniform.
CH had a burst release from the original and coated retainers in the early stage, but the release rate abruptly decreased and stayed stable in the late stage (Fig. 3 ). The mechanisms have been analyzed in the above sections. Here, the evidence was also provided by SEM that showed the states of filaments and retainers before and after dissolution. The blank filament expressed the smooth surface and rough section without any CH crystals (Fig. 4a–d ). CH crystals appeared on the surface and in the inner space of CH-loaded filaments (Fig. 4e–h ), which were similar to but not the same as the crystals of CH powders (Fig. 4h and the inset image). When the filament was prepared, CH powders were mixed with melted PEG 4000 to form a suspension and the formers were coated with a film of PEG, leading to a rough surface of CH crystals in the filaments. The CH crystals on the surface of filaments would remain on the surface of 3D-printed retainers. Fig. 4 SEM images of the surface ( a , b , enlarged a ) and inner section ( c , d , enlarged c ) of blank filaments and the surface ( e , f , enlarged e ) and inner section ( g , h , enlarged g ) of CH-loaded filaments. The inset image in graph ( h ) indicates the crystals of 100-mesh CH powders. The arrows indicate the crystals of CH in the filaments
The SEM image of the surface of CH-loaded original retainers showed a layer-by-layer appearance (Fig. 5a ), resulting from the typical FDM printing process [ , ]. Moreover, some microparticles appeared on the surface of retainers (Fig. 5a, b ), and also appeared in the inner space (Fig. 5c ). These microparticles should be the crystals of CH according to the above analysis. The particles on the surface would be quickly dissolved in PBS in the dissolution experiment, leading to the burst release of CH. After dissolution, many pores appeared on the surface and in the inner space of retainers (Fig. 5d ), resulting from dissolving of CH and PEG. The formed channels would benefit the release of CH from the inner space. PEG is a good pore-forming agent, which has been used in 3D-printed vaginal rings to improve the release of progesterone [ ]. The function of Tween 80 was discussed in our previous report [ ]. Tween 80 is a commonly used surfactant that can improve the release of drugs by making the surfaces and inner interfaces of 3D-printed structures wettable for easy introduction of water. Fig. 5 SEM images of the surface ( a ) and inner section ( b ) of CH-loaded original retainers and the surface ( c ) and inner section ( d ) of CH-loaded original retainers at 72 h post-dissolution. The arrows indicate the crystals of CH. The circles indicate the pores on the surface and in the inner space of retainers
In our previous research, a hydrophobic drug, progesterone, was 3D printed to a vaginal ring, wherein the release of progesterone was the key parameter for formulation screening [ ]. A solid dispersion of progesterone with PEG 4000 was prepared to improve its release. More dissolution improving techniques than solid dispersions can be applied to 3D printing of hydrophobic drug-loaded retainers, such as micronization, cyclodextrin complexes, and salting, which can be optimized according to the physicochemical properties of drugs, dosing, and needs of release profiles.
Coating resulted in a continuous film on the surface of retainers, and the layers were hardly differentiated (Fig. 6a ). Some pores appeared on the surface of coated retainers after 72 h dissolution (Fig. 6b ). The coated insoluble EC layers could hinder the formation of pores, leading to the slow release of CH in the late dissolution stage. Some pores were also formed on the surface of CH-loaded washed retainers (Fig. 6c ). The 4 h-washed retainer had the same state as the original retainer at 4-h post-dissolution so that the burst release of surface CH was avoided. Fig. 6 SEM images of the surface ( a ) of CH-loaded coated retainers, the surface ( b ) of CH-loaded coated retainers at 72 h post-dissolution, and the surface ( c ) of CH-loaded washed retainers at 4 h post-washing. The circles indicate the pores on the surface
Simulated Stable Drug Concentrations in Circulation
The simulated CH concentration-time profiles showed the initial high concentrations after administration of original and coated retainers due to the burst CH release, although the concentrations of the latter were less than those of the former (Fig. 7 ). The T max was observed around 3 h and then fast decreased until 72 h. However, CH plasma concentrations slowly increased from the beginning of administration of washed retainers; more importantly, there was no burst CH release. At 7-h post-administration, a suitable CH concentration of 0.5 ng/mL was already reached. After then, the stable concentrations (0.5–0.7 ng/mL) were maintained up to 72 h. The concentration range is close to the reported effective therapeutic concentration of CH [ ]. The dose of CH in the retainer can further be modified according to the need of pharmacotherapy, which is one of the advantages of 3D printing technology. Therefore, the wearable personalized CH-loaded washed retainer is clinically applicable because a very long-term treatment can be achieved. Fig. 7 Simulated CH concentration-time profiles in the circulation after administration of different CH-loaded retainers
CONCLUSIONS
Both hypertension and ADHD require long-term drug administration and precision dosing control, where traditional dosage forms such as tablets and injections are unsatisfactory. In this study, we applied 3D printing technology to prepare wearable personalized drug-loaded orthodontic retainers. Moreover, the dose of drugs and the release behavior can be modified on demand according to the need of pharmacotherapy. Washing is a simple and convenient method to eliminate the burst release of water-soluble drug-loaded retainers and decrease concentration-induced adverse reactions. Simulated stable and appropriate CH concentrations in the circulation can be maintained for more than 3 days after wearing a washed retainer. Besides hypertension and ADHD therapy, 3D-printed orthodontic retainers can also be used for treatment of oral diseases, such as periodontal diseases, oral candidiasis, herpetic gingivostomatitis, and oral squamous cell carcinoma, or mental disorders. Wearable personalized 3D-printed drug-loaded orthodontic retainers are a promising drug-device for sustained release of drugs.