INTRODUCTION
Humans have developed a large resistance to antifungal drugs, which has motivated the development of novel agents to overcome infectious diseases. The challenge of the treatment and prevention of invasive fungal infections is underscored by their high incidence in immunocompromised hosts as well as by their formidable morbidity and mortality ( ). Candida species account for the 3/4th of various fungal infections (oral/topical/vaginal). Currently, antifungal therapy in comparison to antibacterial chemotherapy has become limited due to paucity of antifungal that are sometimes toxic, ineffective, and often expensive. Therefore, it remains a challenge to develop newer approaches with innovative delivery systems for existing compounds in infectious disease, like oropharyngeal candidiasis ( ) that requires an effective localized therapy.
Miconazole nitrate (MZ) (1H-imidazole, 1-[2-(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-2-[(2,4-dichlorophenyl)methoxy]ethyl-mononitrate) is an imidazole derivative commonly used in the treatment of topical and oral fungal infections arising from Candida species. MZ is a BCS class II drug having a 6.25 partition coefficient in the octanol-water system ( ). MZ is slightly soluble in methanol and dimethylformamide (DMF) but insoluble in water. MZ is reported for its dual mechanism of action, inhibition of peroxidases, and ergosterol biosynthesis, causing cell death. Due to the poor water solubility, MZ exhibits limited dissolution properties, and its peroral use has resulted in severe gastrointestinal disturbances as well. Marketed MZ tablets have also been found to interact with other drugs, causing hepatocellular toxicity. For this reason, and due to drug elimination problems, MZ tablets have been contraindicated in patients with renal failure ( ). In comparison to other antifungal agents, MZ is more effective against oral candidiasis. Therefore, there is a need for a novel approach that can enhance the physiochemical properties with better localization and bypass the side effects of MZ.
Oropharyngeal candidiasis (OPC) is an infection in the oral cavity caused by yeast, especially Candida species. Immunosuppressed patients infected with the human immune virus (HIV) receiving an organ transplant or chemotherapy are more prone to the development of OPC ( ). Both the prevalence and relapse are very high in HIV patients. The available therapies, such as oral topical antifungal dosage form, have limitations like short residence time in the oral mucosa, requiring frequent dosing ( ).
Self-nanoemulsifying delivery systems (SNEDS) are translucent stable dispersions with oil and aqueous phase stabilized by surfactant and cosurfactant-based film, enclosing droplets of size less than 100 nm. Nanoemulsion (NE)-based formulations can be filled into capsules and even dispersed into the suitable gelling medium, having certain mucoadhesion properties. This results in the formation of a nanoemulgel for oral and topical routes of delivery ( ). Earlier studies have reported that along with improving the solubility of drugs, the nanoemulgel has indicated enhanced permeation and performance both in vitro and in vivo . Controlling for appearance, viscosity, and degree of greasiness allows the nanoemulgel to have a greater residence time in oral mucosa and ability to be easily washed off whenever desired ( ). For this reason, most of the water-in-oil emulsions are extensively used in nanoemulgels that can efficiently deliver hydrophobic drugs. The demand and use of nanoemulgels have substantially increased due to their better thixotropic and non-staining properties, long shelf-life, emollient, and easy spreadability, all of which can be an advantage for oral topical delivery ( ).
Hyaluronic acid (HA) is a non-sulfate glycol-amino-glycan (GAG) commonly found within the extracellular matrix (ECM) of connective tissues (soft). HA is a linear chain polymer containing alternating glucuronic acid and N -acetylglucosamine disaccharide units ( ). Earlier reports have indicated that HA has superior tissue healing properties that enable activation and moderate inflammatory responses, promoting angiogenesis, activation, and migration. HA is hygroscopic in nature, indicating stronger re-epithelization through basal keratinocyte-based proliferation. This can be advantageous if used in the formulation for oral mucosa since it controls tissue hydration during inflammation or injury around the ulceration ( ). Commercial oral gels contain only drug dispersed into the gel matrix due to limited solubility, which actually results in lower residence time of gel in the oral cavity, requiring frequent administration. Combining NE dispersed into an HA-based gel to form a nanoemulgel can overcome this problem and even provide superior benefits that can be valuable in the treatment of oral hygiene or diseases ( ).
In the present study, self-emulsifying NE of MZ was optimized and characterized using factorial design. Further, it was loaded into an HA-based gel, forming a nanoemulgel that was examined for rheological properties. In comparison to the marketed products, the prepared nanoemulgel is expected to overcome physiochemical properties and side effects, and due to its thixotropic behavior, it is expected to aid in the localization along the cavity. The prolonged release of MZ from NE-HA gel at the infectious area would improve pharmacotherapy, especially in the treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis, reducing the dosing frequency.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
MZ pure drug was as a generous gift from Bayer, Germany. Castor oil, clove oil, sesame oil, oleic acid, sefsol, and triacetin were purchased from Acros Organics™, USA. Tween 20, Tween 80, Labrasol, and Cremophor were obtained from Tedia Company, USA. Capryol 90, propylene glycol, PEG 200, PEG 400, isopropyl alcohol, and ethanol were ordered from Sigma-Aldrich, USA. Gantrez® S-97 (GAN) (the acid form of methyl vinyl ether and maleic anhydride copolymer) (Mw = 1.2 × 106 Da) was provided by Ashland (Tadworth, Surrey, UK). The marketed MZ cream (Daktarin 2%, Janssen, India contains miconazole 2%, glycerol, purified water, pregelatinized potato starch, ethanol, polysorbate 20, saccharin sodium, cocoa flavor, orange flavor) was dispensed from a community pharmacy. Analytical grade chemicals or reagents were used throughout the study.
Identifying the Emulsifying Region of MF Surfactants and Oil Components
To determine and plot the possible emulsifying regions, it is necessary to elucidate the solubility of MZ in different oil or surfactant components ( ). Choosing various surfactants or oil components leads to different emulsifying regions for the nanoformulation. In this study, the solubility of MZ was carefully checked in oils like castor oil, castor oil, clove oil, sesame oil, oleic acid, sefsol, and triacetin. MZ solubility in Tween 20, Tween 80, Labrasol, and Cremophor surfactants was also examined. The MZ solubility was examined in cosurfactant like Capryol 90, propylene glycol, PEG 200, PEG 400, and isopropyl alcohol. MZ in excess amount was added in vials containing the oil or surfactant components. Different vials were shaken for about 74 h at 25°C using a water bath under controlled conditions (Model 1031; GFL Corporation, Germany). With the visual assessment of equilibrium establishment, the mixtures were subjected to centrifugation (Sigma 3k30, Germany) at 3500 rpm up to 30 min. The obtained supernatant was carefully collected and diluted with methanol. The concentration with respect to absorbance was spectrophotometrically determined at 250 nm ( λ max ) ( ). All the sample analyses were performed in triplicate ( n = 3).
Design of Experiment (DOE) to Optimize the NE (NE)
To draw a relation between process variable and outputs or factors affecting both, the design of the experiment was pivotal, especially when formulating NE that was to be further loaded into a gel ( ). Extreme vertices design was selected to standardize the effects of 3 variables in random 18 runs. The components were X 1 as oil percentage (clove oil), X 2 as surfactant percentage (Labrasol), and X 3 as a cosurfactant percentage (propylene glycol) to formulate a NE with least globule size. The design of the experiment helped us both analyze and record the response ( Y ) as outcomes, namely globule size ( Y 1 ) and inhibition zone ( Y 2 ). The attainable ratios for various components chosen for the optimization formulation are depicted in Table I . Statgraphics® Centurion XV (Software), Version 15.2.03 (StatPoint, USA), was employed to harmonize the regression equations further to calculate the recorded responses. Table I Selected Ratio of Variables for the Mixture Design Component Ratio Low High X 1 : clove oil % 10 25 X 2 : Labrasol % 45 70 X 3 : propylene glycol % 10 30
Formulation and Accretion of MZ-NE by DOE
A total of 18 formulas were prepared by permutation and combination of components (surfactant/oil/cosurfactant) with various ratios. All formulations contained MZ of 10 mg. Possible combinations of all formulations (~ 100%) are shown in Table II . Table II Mixture Design Suggested Composition with the Observed Mean for Variables Y 1 and Y 2 Runs # X 1 X 2 X 3 Y 1 Y 2 Clove oil Labrasol Propylene glycol Globule size Inhibition zone 1 0.25 0.65 0.1 140 33 2 0.2 0.7 0.1 95 25 3 0.1 0.7 0.2 65 23 4 0.1 0.6 0.3 110 21 5 0.25 0.45 0.3 170 28 6 0.215 0.635 0.15 119 29 7 0.215 0.635 0.15 119 29 8 0.14 0.66 0.2 78 23 9 0.14 0.61 0.25 88 23 10 0.215 0.535 0.25 163 26 11 0.225 0.675 0.1 114 30 12 0.25 0.55 0.2 185 30 13 0.15 0.7 0.15 70 24 14 0.1 0.65 0.25 73 22 15 0.175 0.525 0.3 150 21 16 0.18 0.62 0.2 110 23 17 0.25 0.65 0.1 142 34 18 0.2 0.7 0.1 93 25
Immediate emulsification (ability to solubilize and to form emulsion) was observed by visual reference with the naked eye. Out of all 18 runs, an optimized formulation was investigated. The optimized formulation had the smallest globule size ( Y 1 ) and maximum inhibition zone ( Y 2 ), which further underwent rheological evaluation, ex vivo permeation, in vitro release, and in vivo studies.
The Ability of Self-Emulsification and Visual Prediction
To determine the formation of MZ-NE formulation, the clarity in visual observation and spontaneity in emulsification were selected as ideal parameters ( ).
MZ-NE Globule Size Determination and Surface Morphology
Approximately 400 mg of formulations was dissolved in 30 ml deionized distilled water. Further, approximately 1 ml samples were examined for size elucidation and distribution by means of a Zetatrac (Microtrac Inc., USA) powered by the dynamic light scattering (DLS) technique ( ). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to examine the surface morphology of optimized MZ-NE formulation.
Determination of Inhibition Zones
Sabouraud dextrose agar medium (SDA) was used to grow and conduct in vitro antifungal studies using Candida albicans strains.
Preparation of Inoculum
Standard strains of C. albicans , about four to five colonies, were selected and suspended in saline (2 ml) and vortexed. McFarland standards of about 0.6 meq were used to adjust for turbidity within the homogenous suspension. A sterile swab was immersed in the suspension and streaked onto the prepared SDA plates to obtain the lawn culture.
Disk Diffusion Method
Filter paper disks (5 mm) were sterilized, placed on MZ-NE (100 μl), and inoculated on dried SDA plates. The disk-inoculated plates were further incubated at 24° ± 2°C ( ). The positive control used was ethanol (99.9%), and the respective zone of inhibitions was examined after 2 days. All collected data were analyzed using ANOVA.
Formulation of MZ-NE-Loaded HA Hydrogel
Preparation of HA Hydrogel
Two percent HA and 0.5% Gantrez® S-97 (Mw = 1.2 × 106 Da) were used as cross-linking agents to prepare an aqueous solution, which was poured into casted molds of 10 × 10 size and allowed to dry for about 48 h. The dried films were cut (1 × 1 cm) and placed in an oven at 81°C for 24 h. The microwave-assisted technique was utilized to prepare hydrogels. The films were placed in the middle of the oven (Panasonic UK Ltd., Bracknell, UK) cavity. The cross-linking of films took 1 h using the oven at the highest output power (1000 W) ( ).
Loading of MZ-NE in HA Hydrogel
The polymeric solution was prepared by sprinkling pH-induced hydrogel (HA) on 6 ml of phosphate buffer saline (PBS) with pH 4.5, at 36 ± 2°C. The solution was stirred at 50 rpm and allowed to hydrate overnight. About 4 ml NE containing 250 mg of MZ was added to the polymeric solution (Fig. 1 ). To ensure any change, the size of the MZ-NE was determined after it was loaded into the hydrogel. The final MZ-NE-loaded HA hydrogel was stored in the refrigerator for further evaluation. Fig. 1 Scheme showing formulation process of MZ-NE-loaded hydrogel
Rheological Evaluation of the MZ-NE-Loaded Hydrogel
The viscosities of different gel formulae were determined using Brookfield Viscometer with spindle 52 at 25°C. We tested 1 g of each formula. To identify the flow behavior of plain HA nanoemulgel and the gel after NE was loaded into a hyaluronic acid gel base, the viscosity was determined at different rates of shear (2, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 s −1 ). The shear rate in s −1 , shear stress in dyne/cm 2 , and the viscosity in centipoise were determined. We studied rheological parameters of different nanoemulgels in which the viscosity of each formula at a minimum rate of shear ( η min ) and at a maximum rate of shear ( η max ) was determined. Farrow et al . equations were applied to study the flow behavior of the different nanoemulgels ( ).
In Vitro Release of the MZ-NE-Loaded Hydrogel
This study was carried out using a USP Dissolution test (Apparatus I). A glass cylindrical tube (2.7 cm in diameter and 10 cm in length) containing the formula to be tested was attached instead of the basket and tightly covered with a semipermeable membrane (100 μm pore size). One gram of tested formulations (2% MZ-SNEDDS-loaded hydrogel, 2% MZ marketed oral gel, and 2% MZ aqueous suspension as control) was placed in the cylindrical tube covered with the semipermeable membrane. The cylindrical tube was dipped in a 250-ml phosphate buffered saline (pH 6.8). The release study was carried out at 37°C + 0.5°C, and the stirring shaft was rotated at a speed of 50 rpm. Samples were withdrawn from the dissolution medium at several time intervals. The amount of dissolved MZ dissolute was quantified by measuring the absorbance spectrophotometrically at λ max 272 nm ( ). Experiments were run in triplicates.
Determination of % Permeation of Optimized MZ-NE Gel Using Ex Vivo Skin Studies
Ex vivo studies to understand the permeability for the optimized 2% MZ-NE - loaded HA oral gel, 2% MZ-SNEDDS, and 2% MZ marketed oral gel were performed on sheep buccal mucosa. The prepared sheep buccal mucosa (2 × 2 cm) was carefully arranged around the opening of the diffusion cell area (1.75 cm 2 ). The apparatus used was an automated Franz diffusion cell (MicroettePlus®, USA). The mucosa adhered to the receptor chamber (8 ml). PBS (pH 6.8) was used as the diffusion media controlled at 32 ± 2°C and stirred at the rate of 410 to 430 rpm. The samples were auto sampled at predetermined intervals and parallel-quantified using earlier reported high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method ( ). Drug diffused across the mounted mucosa was elucidated by plotting the cumulative amount of MZ permeated ( Q ) per unit time and area. Important parameters, like J ss (steady-state flux), Pc (permeability coefficient), EF (enhancement factor), and D (diffusion coefficient), were calculated from the obtained diffusion data. The comparative diffusion patterns with respect to various formulations were plotted. Percentage MZ permeated and the total amount of MZ diffused across the receptor chamber were calculated using the following equation ( ): $$ \mathrm{Percentage}\ \mathrm{permeated}=\left[\mathrm{MZp}/{\mathrm{MZ}}_{\mathrm{T}}\right]\times 100 $$ (1) where MZp is the amount of MZ that permeated into the receptor chamber and MZ T the initial amount of MZ in the donor chamber.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Emulsification Region and MZ Solubility in Surfactants, Cosurfactant, and Oils
MZ solubility at saturation point in different NE compositions was determined and reported in Fig. 2 . Among the various slicks, MZ showed higher solubility in clove oil (190 mg/ml), followed by sefsol (142 mg/ml), oleic acid (135 mg/ml), and in olive oil (82 mg/ml). Regarding the surfactant and cosurfactants, MZ exhibited greater solubility in Labrasol (66 mg/ml), followed by Tween 80 (51 mg/ml) and propylene glycol (121 mg/ml). Therefore, the ternary phase diagrams of MZ were constructed using clove oil (oil), Labrasol (surfactant), and propylene glycol (cosurfactant) as the final components. Fig. 2 The solubility of MZ in NE preparation components (surfactants, cosurfactant, and oils)
It is very difficult to design and obtain a NE that is transparent and with good stability. Tools like linear model mixture design are quite useful in optimizing the MZ-NE with components like oil, surfactant, and cosurfactant. An ideal NE has a droplet size of not more than 80 nm and the ability to resist Ostwald ripening that prevents storage instability on storage. These ideal characteristics are based on the quality, nature (hydrophobic/hydrophilic), and property type of oil, surfactant, or cosurfactant selected for the study ( ).
Different MZ-NEs were formulated after carefully examining the nature of various oil, surfactant, and cosurfactant. The optimized formulation was subjected to various characterizations and evaluation studies. Earlier studies have reported that oil with large viscosity and triglycerides (long-chained) has maximum globule size ( ). In the present study, clove oil was chosen due to its low rheology and high MZ solubility (190 mg/ml) with respect to other fats, like sefsol, oleic acid, and olive oil. The selected clove oil had not only minimal globule size, but also better stability through acting as a thermodynamic barrier against the drug precipitation or Ostwald ripening, stabilizing NE even in accelerated stability conditions ( ). Natural oil, like clove oil, was reported to show greater MZ solubility with maximum loading and localized delivery with respect to oils like sefsol, oleic acid, and olive oil that have shown lower strength to solubilize MZ (lipophilic drug). Hence, clove oil (0.22%) was selected in the formulation of optimized MZ-NE.
Surfactant for formulating the NE was selected based on the ease, spontaneity, and ability to solubilize the drug along with the characteristic feature of enhancing the intended MZ perfusion between the mucosa layers, further increasing the bioavailability ( ). A wrong choice or irrational use can even lead to an adverse effect, like hypersensitivity. Hence, rational selection of surfactant at the minimal concentration is important for optimization.
Both hydrophilic and non-ionic surfactants with good hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB) have high usefulness with proven stability ( ). Labrasol (0.67%) was utilized to optimize formulation due to its superlative flux and nano emulsifying region with respect to Tween 80 and Cremophor that have shown very low MZ solubility. The experimental trials have indicated that the combination of clove oil with Labrasol formed better MZ-NE with good stability. Labrasol has even been reported for its good biocompatibility and good adhesion properties in previous studies ( ).
Cosurfactant is used in the NE preparation mainly to minimize the surfactant ratio in the formulation. Most short and medium-chained alcohols have an ability to reduce the interfacial tension, enhancing the interface fluidity, further raising the oil miscibility and aqueous phase. Across the assessments, propylene glycol of 0.1% was fixed as optimum concentration. Propylene glycol that has been used was for enhanced tolerability and increased permeation in oral topical delivery ( ).
Mixture Design Tool in the Optimization of MZ-NE
Mixture design was employed to optimize MZ-based NE having a narrow globular size ( Y 1 ) and maximum inhibition zone ( Y 2 ). The tool output indicated 18 formulations of varying components comprising clove oil % ( X 1 ), Labrasol % ( X 2 ), and propylene glycol % ( X 3 ) (Table II ).
Tables III and IV summarize the analysis of variance for the ongoing preferred special cubic model. The model showed a strong correlation between the globule size, inhibition zones, and even at confidence level of 95.0% ( P value < 0.05). The R-squared data from the fitted model indicated 98.48 and 95.26% of the variability in globule size and inhibition zones, respectively. The adjusted R-squared statistic, which is more suitable for comparing models with different numbers of independent variables, was 97.6477 and 92.8314% for globule size and inhibition zones, respectively. The standard error of the estimate showed the standard deviation of the residuals to be 5.60024 and 1.05865 for globule size and inhibition zones, respectively. The mean absolute error (MAE) was 3.53901 and 0.7181 for globule size and inhibition zones, respectively, indicating the average value of the residuals. Table III ANOVA Data for Y 1 (Globule Size) Source Sum of squares Df Mean square F ratio P value Special cubic model 22,320.6 6 3720.1 118.62 0.002 Total error 344.989 11 31.3626 Total (corr.) 22,665.6 17 Table IV ANOVA Data for Y 2 (Zone Inhibitions) Source Sum of squares Df Mean square F ratio P value Quadratic model 252.329 5 50.4658 45.03 0.003 Total error 13.4489 12 1.12074 Total (corr.) 265.778 17
The equation of the fitted model was $$ \mathrm{Globular}\ \mathrm{size}\ \left({Y}_1\right)=842.059\times \mathrm{clove}\ \mathrm{oil}+131.268\times \mathrm{Labrasol}+401.403\times \mathrm{propylene}\ \mathrm{glycol}-1195.45\times \mathrm{clove}\ \mathrm{oil}\times \mathrm{Labrasol}-1704.28\times \mathrm{clove}\ \mathrm{oil}\times \mathrm{propylene}\ \mathrm{glycol}-718.657\times \mathrm{Labrasol}\times \mathrm{propylene}\ \mathrm{glycol}+2444.06\times \mathrm{clove}\ \mathrm{oil}\times \mathrm{Labrasol}\times \mathrm{propylene}\ \mathrm{glycol}.. $$ (2)
The equation of the fitted model was $$ \mathrm{Inhibition}\ \mathrm{zone}\ \left({Y}_2\right)=75.7988\times \mathrm{clove}\ \mathrm{oil}+17.5875\times \mathrm{Labrasol}+6.35915\times \mathrm{propylene}\ \mathrm{glycol}-38.9623\times \mathrm{clove}\ \mathrm{oil}\times \mathrm{Labrasol}-33.9337\times \mathrm{clove}\ \mathrm{oil}\times \mathrm{propylene}\ \mathrm{glycol}+40.9276\times \mathrm{Labrasol}\times \mathrm{propylene}\ \mathrm{glycol}-73.3347\times \mathrm{clove}\ \mathrm{oil}\times \mathrm{Labrasol}\times \mathrm{propylene}\ \mathrm{glycol}\dots $$ (3)
Surface Response Methodology to Optimize the MZ-NE Formulation
Effects of X 1 , X 2 , and X 3 on variables Y 1 and Y 2 of NE were explained using response and contour plots Figs. 3 and 4 . Fig. 3 a Estimated response surface as a contour plot. b Estimated 3D response surface effect for globule size ( Y 1 ) Fig. 4 a Estimated response surface as a contour plot. b Estimated 3D response surface effect for inhibition zone ( Y 2 )
Both 3D contours in Figs. 3 and 4 and Eqs. ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) indicated high ratios of X 1 oil, X 2 surfactant, and X 3 cosurfactant that had significantly decreased the globule size in the formulation. Within the triangle image, the blue area indicates minimum globule size area and maximum inhibition zones. Equations ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) of regression helped formulate the optimized MZ-NE. The optimized MZ-NE formula components along with the predicted, observed, and residual values are given in Table V . Table V Predicted, Observed, and Residual Values for the Optimized MZ-NE Formulation Components Optimum Clove oil %, ( X 1 ) 0.227665 Labrasol %, ( X 2 ) 0.672335 Propylene glycol %, ( X 3 ) 0.1 Response Predicted Observed Residual Globule size 67 65 2 Inhibition zone 22 21 1
DOE helped prepare the formulation based on the spontaneity of formulation requiring minimum low free energy without any formation of the metastable system. The selected components of NE, like clove oil, surfactant, and cosurfactant used, are expected to have a greater influence on globule size of droplet and inhibition zones and much influence on drug permeation and penetration ability across the oral mucosa. The rational use of the lipophilic substance is to increase bilayer fluidity that can fuse with stratum corneum lipids across the oral cavity ( ). Loading of the optimized NE formulation into an HA hydrogel did not indicate any change in the globule size of NE. Loading of NE can actually increase the tissue hydration, having an emollient effect on the fungal growth, promoting effective MZ delivery and enhanced antifungal activity ( ) in comparison to the MZ-SNEDDS or marketed MZ oral gel (Daktarin 2%, Janssen, India). The optimized MZ-NE formulation was distinctly spherical in shape with smooth surfaces, as recorded by TEM (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 5 TEM image of optimized MZ-NE formulation
Rheological Test for the MZ-NE-Loaded HA Nanoemulgel Formulations
It is important to evaluate the rheological properties of the nanoemulgel as a dosage form to predict their behavior in vivo ( ). It is clear from the obtained result that incorporating the MZ-NE within the gels increased viscosity values for HA emulgel. The η min for MZ-NE-loaded emulgel (142,000 cp) was higher than η min for plain gel (106,314 cp). Rheogram of the prepared gel formulations was plotted, with Y -axis representing the shear rate and X -axis representing the shear stress, as shown in Fig. 6 . Fig. 6 Rheogram of the different HA gels, plain and loaded with optimized MZ-NE
The flow behavior of different nanoemulgels is described in Table VI . From the data in the table, all nanoemulgels indicated thixotropic behavior with the pseudoplastic flow, which is a desirable property while preparing pharmaceutical gels [ ]. Table VI Rheological Parameters of HA Gel, Plain and Loaded with Optimized MZ-NE Formulation Formula number Viscosity (min.) (cp) Viscosity (max.) (cp) Farrow’s constant N Flow behavior Plain gel 106,314 ± 9303 1874 ± 193 3.0264 Pseudoplastic LMZ-NE-loaded HA gel 142,000 ± 11,435 2356 ± 342 3.0002 Pseudoplastic
Table VI shows the viscosity of each formula at a minimum rate of shear ( η min ) and at a maximum rate of shear ( η max ). It is clear that for each formula, the η max is less than η min indicating a structural breakdown of the polymeric chains during shear. Figure 7 shows the relation between the viscosity and shear rate of different nanoemulgels at various concentrations. Fig. 7 Plots of the rate of shear ( G ) versus viscosity ( η ) for plain HA nanoemulgel and MZ-NE-loaded HA nanoemulgel
It should be noted that an inverse relationship emerged between shear rate and viscosity. Therefore, a typical pseudoplastic flow was obtained. To obtain the value of Farrow’s constant ( N ), which indicates the deviation from the Newtonian flow, log G was plotted against log F and N obtained from the slope, as shown in Fig. 8 . Fig. 8 Plots of log rate of shear ( G ) versus log shearing stress ( F ). a For plain HA nanoemulgel. b For MZ-NE-loaded HA nanoemulgel
It is clear from the results that N is greater than one, indicating pseudoplastic flow “shear rate thinning.” This could be due to the structural breakdown of the intermolecular interactions between polymeric chains during shear and after removal of the shearing force. The polymerization has reoccurred due to Van der Waal interaction between the polymer molecules ( ).
In Vitro Release of the MZ-NE-Loaded Hydrogel
The in vitro release profiles for MZ-NE HA nanoemulgel, marketed gel, and MZ aqueous suspension exhibited slow release. The initial release rate of the drug was delayed due to incomplete gel formation, but the release sped up after the gel was completely formed and remained at a steady state due to the pseudoplastic flow. The results after 3 h showed that MZ-NE-loaded nanoemulgel showed the highest cumulative percentage of the drug released at 72% compared to marketed gel and MZ aqueous suspension, which showed 32 and 15%, respectively (Fig. 9 ). This could have been due, in part, to this MZ-NE having the smallest droplet size and the lowest viscosity of the other marketed gel and aqueous suspension of MZ ( ). Fig. 9 In vitro releases of MZ aqueous suspension, marketed gel, and MZ-NE-loaded hydrogel formulation
Percentage of MZ Permeated from NE Formulation by Ex Vivo Permeation Studies
The cumulative MZ that perfused after 3 h was 1305, 1600, and 550 μg/cm 2 for the MZ-NE optimized gel, MZ-SNEDDS suspension, and the marketed 2% MZ gel (Daktarin 2%, Janssen, India), respectively. The J ss , D , and P of optimized MZ-NE were greater in comparison to 2% marketed gel and MZ-SNEDDS suspension (Table VII ). With respect to the other examined formulations, optimized MZ-NE nanoemulgel had maximum MZ permeation across the mucosa ( ). Table VII Parameters of Permeation for MZ Across Rat Skin for Different Formulations Parameters of permeation MZ marketed gel (Daktarin 2%, Janssen) An optimized MZ-NE gel formulation MZ-SNEDDS suspension Cumulative amount permeated (μg/cm 2 ) 1305 1600 550 Steady-state flux, J ss , (μg/cm 2 min) 4.916 6.335 2.345 Permeability coefficient, P , (cm/min) 1.22 × 10 −4 1.5 × 10 −4 0.583 × 10 −4 Diffusion coefficient, D , (cm 2 /min) 32.3 × 10 −5 56.05 × 10 −5 7.03 × 10 −5 Relative permeation rate (RPR) – 1.29 0.367 Enhancement factor ( F en ) 2.37 2.96 –
To understand the cumulative MZ permeation, graphs in Fig. 10 (time vs. square root of time) compare the optimized MZ-NE gel formulation, MZ-SNEDDS, and marketed MZ gel. Fig. 10 a Permeation profiles and b diffusion model plots of MZ over rat skin from the optimized MZ-NE gel, 1% MZ-SNEDDS, and MZ marketed cream
The results of ex vivo skin permeation of MZ from the MZ-NE HA nanoemulgel after 4 h retention proved that MZ had permeated from the optimized NE formulation, and it differed significantly ( P ≤ 0.05) from other formulations. The outcomes are due primarily to the presence of a nanosized MZ that easily permeates the skin. Labrasol and propylene glycol act as penetration enhancers that aid in drug transport through the skin ( ).
Oral thrush is not just a superficial manifestation but the fungal growth prevailing from deeper mucous layers ( ). Therefore, the permeation of MZ into deeper layers is of utmost importance. The present study outcomes have indicated that the combination of Labrasol and propylene glycol helped increase the mean residence time and permeate in the oral cavity. This is due primarily to more affinity of Labrasol towards the oral membrane and the ability of propylene glycol to transform into larger micelles that allow for the increased extraction of possible skin-based lipids, allowing higher MZ to cross the oral mucosa cavity ( ). Cosurfactant and surfactant interchange with keratin-based filaments with disruption is advantageous for drug transport ( ). The HA has sufficiently prolonged the local contact along the oral cavity, maintaining the MZ bioavailability for a prolonged period, reducing the dosing frequency, and bypassing the gastric side effect. These attributes are preferred over the marketed gel and outrange their uses that are clinically inefficient.
CONCLUSION
The formulation and optimization of MZ-based NE were successful using the linear model design. The optimized MZ-NE formulation had a globule size of 113 nm with a distinct spherical shape composed of clove oil (0.22%), Labrasol (0.67%), and propylene glycol (0.1%). The MZ-NE nanoemulgel was prepared using 0.5% HA that showed pseudoplastic flow with a thixotropic behavior. The optimized MZ-NE-loaded HA nanoemulgel indicated prolonged release due to greater tissue permeation in comparison to marketed gel and SNEDDS. The novel oral mucosal designed delivery system has a great potential to overcome major drawbacks of marketed gel. This can benefit both clinicians and patients with improved pharmacotherapy of oral thrush.