INTRODUCTION
Acute lung injury (ALI) caused by various clinical diseases (such as trauma, shock, and severe infection) is a syndrome with extensive damage of the alveolar-capillary barrier ( , ) and characterized by deposition of inflammatory cells, release of inflammatory mediators, and increase of alveolar-capillary permeability. ALI has a high mortality ( ) and often treated with glucocorticoid for inflammatory cell deposition, inflammatory mediator release, and pulmonary edema due to its strong anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects ( , ). However, glucocorticoid treatment is not effective for alleviating pulmonary vascular endothelial cell injuries. Human vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) are distributed around the whole body, including the lungs. These cells have unique vascular biological functions ( , , ). Inflammation changes the activity of pulmonary vascular endothelial cells and increases their permeability ( , , ). Endothelial cell dysfunction and injury can lead to an increase of leukocyte adhesion and migration, imbalance of cytokines, and dysregulation of coagulation/anticoagulation ( ). If not treated, endothelial cell injury would be aggravated, thus accelerating the progression of ALI. For this reason, many scholars have explored new and effective ways to treat ALI via anti-inflammation ( ), anti-apoptosis ( ), and reducing tissue damages ( , ) to alleviate the injury of pulmonary vascular endothelial cells. Moreover, glucocorticoid has serious adverse effects and is unable to be specifically delivered to the inflammatory site. Compared with high-dose glucocorticoid, low-dose glucocorticoid can obviously decrease the release of inflammatory mediators in the lungs, thus decreasing the morbidity and mortality ( ) although its toxicity and side effects (such as joint injury and cataract) cannot be ignored. Currently, ALI is mainly treated and prevented via mechanical intervention, surgical intervention, and anesthesia management intervention. However, all these treatments are not very effective in clinics for ALI and multiple interventions are likely to cause secondary lung damages. Although pulmonary delivery can increase the drug content in the lungs, it is difficult to achieve the precise dose of drugs. Limited by the size of particles, it is non-selective and easily damages the lungs after long-term drug administration. Therefore, we chose to use systemic drug delivery to avoid damage to the normal lung tissue by improving the targeting of the carrier to reach the pneumonia site.
Researches have shown that inflammatory reactions could produce pro-inflammatory cytokines, including E-selectin, an abundantly expressed cytokine on the surface of endothelial cells. E-selectin could bind to polysaccharide polymer sialyl Lewis X (sLex) on the surface of leukocytes, thereby promoting interactions between endothelial cells and leukocytes and participating inflammatory responses, and eventually leading to the increase of oxidative stress and cell apoptosis ( , , , ). Therefore, scholars have utilized E-selectin-mediated targeting strategy by using sLex or their derivatives as targeting agents to deliver macromolecules such as immunoliposomes and nanoparticles to inflammatory and cancer tissues ( ). However, due to weak interactions between selectin and sLex (Kd in the millimolar range), this strategy could not support firm binding of the drug delivery carriers to the endothelium. Moreover, natural product extracts have inevitable immunogenicity, and synthesis of analogues of natural polysaccharide polymers is complex, which limits the routine use of Lewis oligosaccharides and their derivatives as targeted ligands ( ).
To solve this problem, we attempted to develop a new precise drug delivery system for ALI with better efficiency and lower toxicity using high-affinity ligands to deliver drugs efficiently and safely to the lungs. In this study, we selected E-selectin-binding peptide (Esbp) as the high-affinity ligand to deliver drugs targeting inflammatory vascular endothelial cells ( , , ). Esbp has advantages of low immunity and easy to prepare and purify in large quantities. Moreover, it can be easily modified to get onto the carrier. The DITWDQLWDLMK sequence found earlier in Esbp by the phage display technique ( , ) could bind to sLex in a non-competitive manner with dissociation constant in the low nanomolar range ( , , , ). To efficiently reduce drug toxicity, we designed and prepared dexamethasone (DXM)–loaded Esbp-modified bovine serum albumin nanoparticles (BSANPs) using the desolvation method for ALI treatment and examined their characteristics as a drug delivery system including drug delivery capacity, particle size, zeta potential, morphology, drug release behavior, biocompatibility, and biological distribution. Both in vivo and in vitro targeting experiments showed that Esbp-modified BSANPs (Esbp-BSANPs) could improve DXM’s biocompatibility in blood and selectively deliver it to the inflammatory location of the lungs. Cytotoxicity test showed that BSANPs had good biocompatibility, which could reduce the damage towards the lungs. Furthermore, we for the first time utilized Esbp-BSANPs to treat ALI mice and demonstrated that drug delivery system indeed improved the targeting ability and biocompatibility of drugs and achieved precise delivery, thus avoiding side effects like systemic toxicity and reducing drug resistance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Bovine serum albumin (BSA) was from Boao Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Esbp was purchased from Qiangyao Biological Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Succinimidyl iodoacetic was purchased from J&K Scientific LTD Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). Dexamethasone (DXM) was obtained from Mascale Pharmaceutical Technology Co., Ltd. (Chengdu, China). Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium was acquired from Hyclone (UT, USA). Bovine fetal serum (FBS) was from Zqxzbio (Shanghai, China). All other reagents and buffer solutions were analytical or HPLC grade. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were provided by West China School of Basic Medical Sciences & Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University. Kunming mice were purchased from Chengdu Dashuo Laboratory Animals Co., Ltd. (Chengdu, China). All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with the guidelines of Sichuan University and approved by the Ethics Committee of Sichuan University. The experiment animal approval protocol number is “SYXK(Chuan)2014-021.”
Methods
Preparation of Different BSANPs
Preparation of DXM-Loaded BSANPs
BSA (150 mg) was dissolved in 10 mL distilled water and its pH was adjusted to 9.0 using sodium hydroxide solution. Then, the solution was first mixed with 3 mL of 7 mg/mL DXM ethanol solution and then with 40 mL ethanol at the rate of 1.5 mL/min with stirring at 500 rpm. Afterward, glutaraldehyde solution (560 μL, 0.5% W/M) was added and stirred for 24 h. The mixture was concentrated to about 10 mL with rotary evaporators (R201, Shenco, China), the conditions for speed of 50 rpm/min and 45°C water bath, and filtrated passing a 1.2-μm filter membrane to obtain DXM-loaded BSANPs.
Preparation of FITC-Loaded BSANPs and DiD-Loaded BSANPs
Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)–loaded BSANPs and dioctadecyl-3,3,3,3-tetramethylindodicarbocyanine perchlorate (DiD)–loaded BSANPs were obtained similarly as described in the “Preparation of DXM-Loaded BSANPs” section.
Preparation of FITC-Labeled, Esbp-Modified DXM-Loaded BSANPs (DXM-Loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs)
Esbp-BSANPs were prepared using the desolvation method by coupling the sulfhydryl group of Esbp to the amino groups on the surface of BSANPs via succinimidyl iodoacetic acid, as previously reported ( ). DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs were prepared as described below. To begin with, 5 mg fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and 5 mg Esbp was dissolved respectively in 500 μL dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The two solutions were added into a 10-mL sodium bicarbonate buffer (pH 9.0). The mixture was incubated overnight at room temperature, dialyzed against phosphate-buffered saline (pH 9.0), dried using freeze-drying method (at − 80°C for 24 h and vacuum dry for 24 h) and prepared as 10 mg/mL FITC-Esbp DMSO solution. Next, succinimidyl iodoacetic DMSO solution (100 μL, 10 mg/mL) was added dropwise into 1 mL DXM-loaded BSANPs (pH 7.5). The solution was put under a stationary condition at room temperature for 1 h and mixed with 100 μL of 10 mg/mL FITC-Esbp DMSO solution homogeneously for overnight at room temperature. The DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs was gathered by ultracentrifugation (Allegra X22, Beckman Coulter, USA).
Preparation of FITC-Loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs and DiD-Loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs
FITC-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs and DiD-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs were obtained similarly as described in the “Preparation of FITC-Labeled, Esbp-Modified DXM-Loaded BSANPs (DXM-Loaded Fitc-Esbp-BSANPs)” section.
Determination of FITC-Esbp Content
The content of FITC-Esbp was measured using an ultraviolet spectrophotometer (Cary 100, Techcomp, China). In preparing nanoparticle hydrolysate, the pH of 2 mL DXM-loaded BSANPs and 2 mL DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs solution was adjusted to 8.0 separately. Add 1 mL 0.25% trypsinase separately to two solutions, put them into 37°C water bath and kept stirring for 2 h. In brief, 2 mL Fitc, 2 mL FITC-Esbp solution, 2 mL Esbp, and 2 mL hydrolysates of DXM-loaded BSANPs and DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs were scanned separately on an ultraviolet spectrophotometer (Cary 100, Techcomp, China) using PBS (pH 7.4) as the blank control. The content of FITC-Esbp was calculated based on the characteristic absorption peak of FITC-Esbp. In addition, the obtained Esbp, Fitc, and FITC-Esbp were further characterized using Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) (PerkinElmer, USA).
Determination of DXM Content
DXM content was analyzed by measuring the absorption at 240 nm using an ultraviolet spectrophotometer (Cary 100, Techcomp, China) with PBS (pH 7.4) as the blank control.
Characterization of Nanoparticles
Particle Size, Polydispersity Index, Zeta Potential, and Stability
The particle size, polydispersity index (PDI), and zeta potential of DXM-loaded BSANPs and DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs were measured using dynamic light scattering (DSL) method at 25°C and at a fixed scattering angle of 90° (Zetasizer Nano ZS90, Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK). DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs (2 mg/mL, 0.01 M PBS) were placed at 37°C for 7 days, and the changes in particle size were evaluated by DLS to study the stability.
Morphology Observation
The morphological properties of DXM-loaded BSANPs and DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs were observed using transmission electron microscopy (H-600, Hitachi, Japan) at a magnification of 15,000×.
Encapsulation Efficiency (EE) and Drug Loading (DL)
The encapsulation efficiency and drug loading were measured by a 10-kDa molecular truncation ultrafilter (Millipore, MA, USA). DXM in unencapsulated substrates after purified was quantified using a Shimadzu LC-10AT high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with an ODS C 18 column of 4.6 mm × 250 mm and 5-μm particle size and a mobile phase of methanol:H 2 O = 70:30 ( v / v ) at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min at 30°C. We used the UV-VIS detector (SPD-10A, Shimadzu, Japan) to detect the absorption at 240 nm and obtained the standard concentration curve at 1–100 μg/mL: y = 82,632 x + 10,519, R 2 = 0.999. The encapsulation efficiency and drug loading were calculated according to the following formula:
$$ EE\left(\%\right)=\frac{W_{\mathrm{total}}-{W}_{\mathrm{free}}}{W_{\mathrm{total}}}\times 100\% $$ $$ DL\left(\%\right)=\frac{W_{\mathrm{total}}-{W}_{\mathrm{free}}}{W_{\mathrm{Np}}}\times 100\% $$ where W total represents the content of total DXM, W free represents the content of free DXM unpackaged by nanoparticles, and W Np means the total amount of nanoparticles.
Blood Compatibility of DXM-Loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs
The biocompatibility of DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs in blood was investigated. In brief, 100-μL nanoparticles (0.15–1.5 mg/mL) were incubated with 2% red blood cells at 37°C for 1 h. The supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 min and its absorbance at 540 nm was determined. PBS and 1% cell lysate were used as negative and positive controls, respectively. The hemolytic rate of DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs was calculated according to the following formula: $$ \mathrm{Hemolysis}=\frac{A_{\mathrm{sample}}-{A}_{\mathrm{negative}}}{A_{\mathrm{positive}}-{A}_{\mathrm{negative}}}\times 100 $$
In Vitro Drug Release
The release behavior of DXM from nanoparticles was examined in vitro using the dialysis method. In brief, DXM and DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs containing 1.5 mg DXM were separately dissolved in a 3-mL PBS buffer (pH 7.4). The solutions were sealed in 8000–12,000-Da dialysis tubing and dialyzed against 30-mL release medium at 37°C in a water bath at a horizontal rotation speed of 70 rpm. At the predetermined time intervals (0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 24, 32, and 48 h), 1 mL release solution was taken out, and the same volume of fresh medium was added at the same time. At last, the contents of DXM in the release solution were analyzed as described in the “Determination of DXM Content” section.
In Vitro Cytotoxicity of Nanoparticles
The in vitro cytotoxicity of free DXM and DXM-loaded nanoparticles was evaluated as the survival rate of HUVECs observed by MTT assay. In brief, 200 μL of DMEM with 10% FBS and 5 × 10 3 HUVECs was seeded into each well of a 96-well plate. The plate was then incubated overnight at 37°C in a humidified incubator supplemented with 5% CO 2 . The cells were then treated with medium containing 1–100 μg/mL DXM or DXM-loaded nanoparticles for 24 h and 48 h, respectively, and DMEM with 10% FBS was used as control. After treatment, the MTT solution (5 mg/mL) was added into each well, and the plate was incubated for 4 h in the incubator. The absorbance of formazan dissolved in DMSO was measured at 570 nm with a plate reader (Thermo Scientific Varioskan Flash, USA), and the cell viability rate was calculated.
Cellular Uptake of BSANPs
Flow Cytometry
The cellular uptake efficiency of FITC-Esbp-BSANPs by activated HUVECs was measured using flow cytometry (Cytomics FC500, Beckman Coulter, Miami, FL, USA). In short, HUVECs were seeded into a 6-well plate with 5 × 10 5 cells per well and activated with tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) for 4 h. The activated HUVECs were treated with 1 mL of serum-free medium containing free FITC, FITC-loaded BSANPs, and FITC-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs, respectively, and incubated for 1 h. After incubation, the cells were collected, washed by iced PBS for three times, and dispersed in 500 μL PBS for analysis using a flow cytometer.
Fluorescence Microscopic Analysis
HUVECs suspension was added into a 24-well plate with 5 × 10 3 cells per well. After incubating with PBS (control group) or TNF-α (experimental group) for 4 h, cells were treated with FITC-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs for 1 h. After washing with PBS, cells were stained with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI) for 15 min. After washing again with iced PBS for three times, cells were observed under an inverted fluorescence microscope (Olympus, Japan).
Biodistribution of BSANPs in the ALI Mouse Model
Establishment of the ALI Mouse Model
The ALI mouse model was established by tracheal instillation of lipopolysaccharide and confirmed by hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining of TNF-α of the lungs as previously reported ( ).
Biodistribution of BSANPs
The biodistribution of FITC-Esbp-BSANPs in the ALI mouse model was determined using fluorescence imaging and high-performance liquid chromatography, as previously reported ( , ).
Biodistribution of DiD-Loaded BSANPs
The biodistribution of DiD-loaded BSANPs in the mouse model with ALI was investigated using DiD as the imaging agent. In detail, DiD-loaded BSANPs were intravenously injected at a dose of 100 μg/kg body weight into each mouse 24 h after the establishment of the mouse model. At 1, 3, and 24 h after administration, mice were sacrificed to collect their organs. As a control, the same organs were also collected from untreated mice. All collected organs were analyzed using IVIS Spectrum system (Caliper, Hopkinton, MA, USA).
Biodistribution of DXM-Loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs in Mice
Mice were randomly divided into three groups and subjected to intravenously injection of free DXM, DXM-loaded BSANPs, and DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs, respectively, at a dose of 9 mg DXM/kg body weight at 24 h after the establishment of the ALI mouse model. Three hours after injection, DXM in plasma and organ samples was extracted using ethyl acetate. The content of DXM in the extracting solution was measured as described in the “Encapsulation Efficiency (EE) and Drug Loading (DL)” section.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Synthesis of FITC-Esbp
Due to the similar nature of Esbp and albumin nanoparticles, the content of Esbp in albumin nanoparticles cannot be directly measured by the characteristic absorption peak. To solve this problem, we modified Esbp using FITC. It is known that labeling using luciferin does not affect the binding of Esbp to E-selectin expressed on the surface of endothelial cells ( ). Two absorption peaks at 491 nm and 281 nm were observed in the UV spectrum (Fig. 1 ). The absorption peak at 491 nm was due to FITC structure, while the shoulder peak at 281 nm was attributed to BSA absorption. In the UV scan spectrum (Fig. 1 ), the hydrolysate of FITC and FITC-Esbp had an obvious absorption peak at 491 nm, which could be the characteristic absorption peak of FITC-Esbp. This evidence showed that FITC was successfully conjugated to Esbp. Under this test condition ( y = 0.1532 x − 0.0203, R 2 = 0.999), the content of FITC-Esbp was calculated as 19.3 μg per milligram BSA. Fig. 1 UV spectra of Fitc, Fitc-labeled Esbp, DXM-loaded BSANPs hydrolysate, and DXM-loaded Fitc-Esbp-BSANPs hydrolysate from 200 to 600 nm
Besides, the FTIR spectrum (Fig. 2 ) further illustrated the successful coupling of FITC to Esbp as well. The FTIR spectrum of Esbp (Fig. 2a ) showed peaks at 1633 cm −1 and 1533 cm −1 , which were related to the N–H bending vibration. The FTIR spectrum of FITC-Esbp (Fig. 2c ) showed characteristic absorption bands of FITC-Esbp at 1120 cm −1 and 1048 cm −1 , which were attributed to the C=S– stretching vibration. The FITC was bound to the amino group of Esbp, so the strength of N–H bending vibration of FITC-Esbp was weaker than Esbp. Compared with Esbp, FITC-Esbp had the C=S– stretching vibration. In conclusion, the results of ultraviolet characteristic absorption spectrum and FTIR analyses synergistically indicated the successful synthesis of FITC-Esbp and DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs ( , ). Fig. 2 The FTIR spectrum of a Esbp, b Fitc, and c Fitc-Esbp in the region from 4000 to 500 cm −1
Characterization of Nanoparticles
The DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs and DXM-loaded BSANPs were successfully prepared via the desolvation method. The nanoparticle solution was concentrated with rotary evaporators in a water bath to remove ethanol. The average particle size, PDI, and zeta potential of DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs were 266.7 ± 2.7 nm, 0.165 ± 0.02, and − 33.64 ± 1.23 mV, respectively, and the average particle size, PDI, and zeta potential of DXM-loaded BSANPs were 251.7 ± 3.1 nm, 0.115 ± 0.03, and − 20.03 ± 1.02 mV, respectively. Figure 3 presents their size distribution measured by dynamic light scattering and their morphology observed under transmission electron microscopy. These results indicated that the particle size of DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs was slightly larger than that of DXM-loaded BSANPs before coupling. DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs were negatively charged with an absolute value between 20 and 40 mV. The nanoparticles also had enough electrostatic repulsion, which could reduce the aggregation, improve the stability, and decrease the absorption at non-pathological sites ( ), which offers low toxicity of drugs to normal tissues. Modification of nanoparticles with Esbp reduced their zeta potential. This probably resulted from the coupling of amino group on the surface of nanoparticles with Esbp. Esbp contains carboxyl group; thus, it could release protons to reduce the zeta potential, which provides evidence for the coupling of Esbp with the amino group of nanoparticles ( ). As shown in Fig. 3b , the appearance and shape of DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs and DXM-loaded BSANPs observed by transmission electron microscopy were similar. Both had a uniform spherical shape and were well dispersed. The particle size of DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs changed a little at 37°C for 7 days (Fig. 3c ). The encapsulation efficiency of DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs was 84.3 ± 2.3% and the drug loading was 6.7 ± 0.32%. Fig. 3 Sizes of DXM-loaded Fitc-Esbp-BSANPs and DXM-loaded BSANPs measured by a DLS and b TEM imaging. c DLS size measurement of changes at pH 7.4 within 7 days.
Blood Compatibility of DXM-Loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs
The blood compatibility of DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs with different concentrations was assessed in 2% red blood cells via the hemolytic test. Figure 4 showed that the hemolytic rate of DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs increases with the increasing concentration: it was less than 5% at 0.5 mg/mL, but more than 10% at 1 mg/mL. Therefore, DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs at concentration < 0.5 mg/mL had good blood compatibility ( ) and could meet the requirements of safe intravenous injection. Fig. 4 Hemolytic rate of DXM-loaded Fitc-Esbp-BSANPs at concentration from 0.15 to 1.5 mg/mL
In Vitro Drug Release
The in vitro drug release behavior of nanoparticles in PBS (pH 7.4) within 48 h was studied. As shown in Fig. 5 , the cumulative release rate of free DXM was 88.2% within 12 h. By contrast, after sudden release at the initial stage (the cumulative release rate reaches about 20%), drug release from DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs was a sustainable process, with the cumulative release rate of < 51.2% at 12 h and gradually increased to 76% at 42 h. The burst drug release at the initial stage was due to the release of DXM adsorbed on the surface of the nanoparticles. The slow release after the burst release was caused by the release of DXM coated in the nanoparticles derived from the erosion and degradation of BSANPs. Overall, using DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs could achieve long-term sustainable drug release and prolonged drug action in the body, suggesting that the reduction of administration frequency and therapeutic effects could be maintained for a prolonged time period. Fig. 5 Release behaviors of free DXM and DXM-loaded Fitc-Esbp-BSANPs at 37°C in pH 7.4 PBS
Influences of Nanoparticles on the Survival Rate of HUVECs
The concentration of DXM is a prerequisite in order to effectively treat inflammation. However, extremely high drug concentration may lead to cytotoxicity, resulting in an increased risk of side effects. The cell viability gradually decreased after treated with an increased concentration of free DXM from DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs containing DXM (1–100 μg/mL) at 24 h (Fig. 6a ) and 48 h (Fig. 6b ), and the toxicity of DXM to normal cells increased with increased free DXM dose. But there was no significant difference among the free drug group, DXM-loaded BSANPs group, and DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs group ( p > 0.05). With the increase of drug concentration, the toxicity of DXM to endothelial cells increased. In Fig. 6b , the survival rate of HUVECs in the DXM-loaded BSANPs and DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs groups was higher than that in the free drug group ( p < 0.05). This demonstrated that the nanoparticle treatment did not influence the normal growth of HUVECs and had good cellular compatibility ( ). Moreover, with the increase of incubation time, drug-loaded nanoparticles could reduce the toxic effect of DXM on HUVECs. These results suggest that our DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs system may allow long-term DXM therapy that mitigates the substantial adverse effects associated with systemic DXM treatment or mechanical intervention of ALI. Fig. 6 Cytotoxicity of free DXM, DXM-loaded BSANPs, and DXM-loaded Fitc-Esbp-BSANPs (1–100 μg/mL) at 24 h ( a ) and 48 h ( b )
Uptake of Nanoparticles by HUVECs
HUVECs have been widely used as the model endothelial cells for in vitro drug uptake after activation by interleukin-1β or TNF-α. It has been reported that the expression of E-selectin reached the maximum in HUVEC after 4 h of TNF-α treatment. Therefore, the uptake efficiencies of BSANPs with various formulations by HUVECs after 4 h of TNF-α treatment were examined using flow cytometry as the mean fluorescence intensity of FITC that has been encapsulated in nanoparticle tracer agent. The results showed that activated HUVECs are able to uptake both free FITC and FITC-loaded BSANPs. However, much higher fluorescence intensity was observed in activated HUVECs exposure to FITC-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs than those incubated with free FITC or FITC-loaded BSANPs. When HUVECs were activated, the fluorescence uptake by FITC-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs was 1.52 times than that by FITC-loaded BSANPs ( p < 0.05, Fig. 7 ). Therefore, we believe that conjugated Esbp is the main reason for the uptake of nanoparticles by activated HUVECs within 1 h. Fig. 7 Uptake of Fitc by activated HUVECs treated with free Fitc, Fitc-loaded BSANPs, and Fitc-loaded Fitc-Esbp-BSANPs
To investigate whether the mechanism of nanoparticles uptake is related to the specific binding between Esbp and E-selectin expressed on the cell surface, HUVECs activated with or without TNF-α were incubated with FITC-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs (green) for 1 h and observed under an inverted fluorescence microscope (Fig. 8 ). The results indicated that the uptake of FITC-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs by inflammatory HUVECs was significantly higher than that of normal cells. FITC itself is a small lipid-soluble molecule that can be rapidly uptaken by passive diffusion ( , ). FITC-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs were uptaken by HUVECs more effectively. Obviously, the uptake of Esbp-modified nanoparticles was increased in TNF-α-activated HUVECs. That is because the E-selectin produced by activated HUVECs has a specific interaction with Esbp ( ). In our experiment, TNF-α activation increased the number of E-selectin on the surface of HUVECs, and the uptake of Esbp conjugated nanoparticles by HUVECs was more effective, thus promoting the binding of nanoparticles to the cells. Given the activation of endothelial cells in the inflammatory sites of ALI, our results strongly suggest that FITC-Esbp-BSANPs can help deliver DXM directly to the inflammatory sites of the lung. Fig. 8 Uptake of Fitc by non-activated HUVECs and activated HUVECs treated with Fitc-loaded Fitc-Esbp-BSANPs
Distribution of FITC-Esbp-BSANPs in Mice
To examine whether FITC-Esbp-BSANPs could target the lungs in vivo in the established ALI mouse model, the distribution of nanoparticles in vivo was investigated. HE staining of mouse lung sections showed that the alveolar septum of the normal mice (Fig. 9a ) had clear structures, showing no obvious congestion of interstitial blood vessels, no neutrophils infiltrating in the interstitial spaces, and no pulmonary interstitial edema. However, mice in the inflammatory group (Fig. 9a ) had a thicker alveolar septum, destroyed alveolar structure, and interstitium infiltrated by a large number of inflammatory cells ( , ). Immunohistochemical staining of lung sections (Fig. 9 ) showed that the content of TNF-α was significantly higher in the inflammatory group than in the normal group, demonstrating the successful establishment of the ALI model. On the basis of the successful establishment of the ALI mouse model, we injected nanoparticles of different dosage forms to investigate their distribution in vivo . We used small animal imaging technology to investigate the in vivo distribution of nanoparticles at different time points. Figure 9b revealed that the fluorescence of DiD-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs in the lungs was obviously higher and lasted longer (> 24 h) than that of the other two groups. HPLC measurement of nanoparticles distribution in the body 3 h after injection showed that the content of DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs in the lungs was obviously higher than that of the other two groups (Fig. 10 ). Especially, it was 1.5 times higher than that of free DXM ( p < 0.05). The results reflected that the DXM-loaded BSANPs and DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs could last longer in the blood cycle, and DXM-loaded FITC-Esbp-BSANPs could selectively accumulate in the lungs. The occurrence of inflammation led to the high expression of E-selectin on the surface of the inflammatory endothelial cells. The specific binding of E-selectin and Esbp ( ) greatly improved the targeting ability of Esbp-BSANPs. Fig. 9 HE staining of lung sections ( a ) of mice (in the normal group and inflammatory group) and in vivo organ images of organs ( b , from left to right: heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) of mice in the inflammatory group Fig. 10 Distribution of drugs in different organs
Biological distribution studies showed that Esbp-BSANPs remained in circulation for a long time and selectively accumulated in the inflammatory parts of the lungs. These characteristics may help to reduce the relative toxicity of the drug. Liposomes are currently the most widely used delivery system for target treatment of inflammatory diseases. Although liposomes have high biodegradability and high drug loading capacity, their strong interaction with the complement system results in their rapid clearance by the reticuloendothelial system ( , ). The smaller the diameter of the nanoparticles, the greater the resistance removed by the reticuloendothelial system ( ) and the longer the remaining time in the circulation. Moreover, the connection between Esbp and the expression of E-selectin on endothelial cells may also help to further extend the therapeutic effect. Our study provides a potential new modality using Esbp as the ligand and BSANPs as the carrier for targeted and safe treatment of pulmonary inflammation and emphasizes the necessity of future studies on safe and effective treatment of pulmonary inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we have successfully prepared the Esbp-modified BSANPs and innovatively used the binding of E-selectin and Esbp to target the lung. The average particle size of Esbp-modified BSANPs detected by DLS and TEM was about 200 nm. Esbp-modified BSANPs had negative charges, which could reduce their accumulation in normal tissues. In vitro release experiments showed that Esbp-modified BSANPs could sustainably release DXM for a long time. Hemolysis and MTT tests showed that Esbp-modified BSANPs had good biocompatibility and blood compatibility and could be used for intravenous injection. In vitro uptake and in vivo distribution experiments demonstrated that Esbp-modified BSANPs could selectively and accurately deliver drugs to the inflammatory sites with high E-selectin expression. In general, Esbp-modified BSANPs could effectively mediate drugs to inflammatory HUVECs and has therapeutic potential as a new strategy for ALI treatment.