INTRODUCTION
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of vision loss affecting geriatric/elderly patients in developed nations. AMD ranks third among the global causes of visual impairment with a blindness prevalence of 8.7% ( , , ). There are ~ 2 million patients having advanced AMD, and more than 8 million patients have an intermediate form of AMD ( ). Of the two types of AMD namely exudative and non-exudative, the former one is the leading cause of severe vision loss and is associated with neovascularization of choroid plexus. The blurring of vision occurs due to damage to the macular region in retinal epithelium due to the buildup of acellular debris at the site ( ). As a follow-up event to damage to epithelial layer, secretion of cytokines such as vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF), ion channel dysfunction, and abnormal lipid metabolism lead to oxidative damage to cells ( ). To compensate for the decreased blood supply at the retinal region, neovascularization occurs that may lead to an increase in the risk of fluid deposition, inflammation, vascular occlusion, and hemorrhage ( , ).
Anti-VEGF therapy has transformed gradually from their use in cancer therapy to being indicated as an off-label for management of AMD ( ). Many clinical trials have been performed using systemic administration of the anti-VEGF agents ( , , , ). At the angiogenic site, there is a prominent expression of VEGF that is a manifestation of the hypoxic condition at the diseased site. Anti-angiogenic agents inhibit neovascularization and vascular permeation by directly binding to the VEGF receptor site as well as circulating VEGF agents ( ). Currently, FDA-approved formulations for the treatment of AMD that are available for intravitreal administration are Lucentis™ (ranibizumab) and Macugen® (pegaptanib). Other treatment option includes the use of Avastin® (Bevacizumab) as an off-label indication and Visudyne® (verteporfin) intended for intravenous administration and activation by laser light once the drug reaches the eye. However, there is unmet need for alternative therapies due to narrow therapeutic index, limitation of single dose, rapid clearance, frequent instillation, low therapeutic effectiveness (for systemically administered agents), poor therapeutic outcome, and adverse effects such as increased intraocular pressure, endophthalmitis, and cataract of the currently available therapy ( ). It has been investigated that the use of these agents does not lead to complete remission of the disease. However, they have proved effective in decreasing the progression of visual impairment and may improve the visual acuity in many patients ( ). Moreover, the therapeutic effectiveness requires frequent dose instillation using invasive procedures which may lead to patient non-compliance. Thus, an approach to minimize the dose instillation frequency and delivery at the local site for maximizing therapeutic effectiveness is to be sought for effective management of AMD. Sunitinib malate (SM), a small molecule kinase inhibitor, has been approved for its indication in renal cell carcinoma and gastrointestinal stromal tumors, which targets multiple receptors such as vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), and stem cell receptors. However, the use of sunitinib is limited due to the associated severe dose-dependent toxicity issues ( , ).
Nanoparticles (NPs) have been widely investigated in the formulation of drugs due to their biocompatibility, biodegradability, and tailoring release profiles that may range from days until months. Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) in a product is approved by the FDA to be used clinically, and it is biocompatible, as well as biodegradable. Considering the ease of translation of PLGA-based product due to biocompatibility and biodegradability, we have selected PLGA for the development of nanoparticles ( , ). It was hypothesized that ophthalmic SM-loaded biocompatible PLGA nanoparticles (SM-NPs) would provide sustained delivery of drug at the target site, and SM-NP-incorporated thermo-reversible gel will show superior sustained release profile which would decrease the dosing frequency as well as will show potential anti-angiogenic effect. The objective of this investigation is to formulate sustained release formulation of SM-NP-incorporated thermo-reversible gel (SM-NP gel) and to evaluate the formulation using physiochemical methods and cell-based assays. The SM-NP gel formulation possessed a unique property of syringeability when at or below room temperature and turned to gel form at body temperature. Thus, the residence time of the formulation will increase after injection, lead to a slower release of drug at the target site, and further decrease the dosing frequency. The thermo-reversible characteristic of gel would aid in the handling of the product prior to use and would improve patient compliance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
SM was purchased from Selleck Chemicals (Houston, TX, USA). PLGA (50:50 lactide glycolide/MW 19000) (Catalogue number (CN): AC436200010); PLGA was purchased from Acros Organics (NJ, USA). Dialysis membrane (MWCO, 12,000 Da) (CN: D6191) and Coumarin 6 dye were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Poly(vinyl alcohol) (Mw 100,000, 87% hydrolyzed) (CN: S93328) was obtained from Fisher Scientific (USA). AK036 (methoxy poly (ethylene glycol)-b-poly (caprolactone) (Mw ~ 750:2,500 Da) poly-vivo thermo gel was purchased from PolySciTech, IN, USA. Fetal bovine serum (FBS) (CN: 10437028) and penicillin-streptomycin (10,000 U/ml) (CN: 15140122) were obtained from Gibco Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA. 3-(4, 5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide salt (MTT reagent) (CN: 5224), and nucleus stain DAPI (4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) (CN: 5748) were purchased from Tocris Bioscience (MN, USA). CellMask™ deep red plasma stain (CN: C10046) was purchased from Molecular Probes, Invitrogen™ Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA. Pierce BCA protein assay kit (CN: 23225) and Invitrogen™ eBioscience™ Human VEGF-A Platinum ELISA Kit (CN: 50-182-08) were purchased from Fisher Scientific, USA. ARPE-19, a human retinal pigment epithelial cell line (ATCC® CRL2302™) and Dulbecco’s Modification of Eagle’s Medium F 12 (DMEM F12) (ATCC® 30-2006™) were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) (VA, USA). Cell culture phosphate buffer saline (1×) (PBS) (CN: MT21040CV) was ordered from Corning Cellgro (Manassas, VA). Trypsin (0.05%) (CN: 25300054) was ordered from Thermo Fisher (Lansing, MI). All other analytical reagent grade chemicals were used without performing any added purification.
Cell Culture
ARPE-19, a human retinal pigment epithelial cell line (ATCC® CRL2302™), cells were grown and maintained in DMEM F12 medium supplemented with 10% v / v FBS and 1% 10,000 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin antibiotics. The cell cultures were allowed to incubate at 37°C temperature, in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO 2 .
Preparation of Sunitinib Malate–Loaded PLGA NPs
SM-NPs were prepared by o/w emulsion solvent evaporation method ( ). A schematic representation of the preparation procedure is provided in Fig. 1 . Briefly, drug and polymer (PLGA (50:50 lactide glycoside, M.W approx. 19000)) were taken at an optimized weight ratio of 1:7 and dissolved in 2 ml of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO): acetone ratio of 1:9 as organic phase. This organic solution was slowly added in 3 ml of 1% w / v PVA solution using 23G syringe under continuous stirring on a magnetic stirrer (Thermo Fisher, Lansing, MI). The resulting emulsion was stirred overnight at 700 rpm for evaporation of the organic solvent. The nanoparticulate suspension obtained was centrifuged first at 5000 rpm for 5 min at room temperature (RT) to remove unentrapped drug followed by centrifuging the supernatant at 18000 rpm for 20 min at RT. The nanoparticle pellet was collected, washed thrice with distilled water, and re-suspended in saline. Placebo nanoparticles and Coumarin 6–loaded nanoparticles (by loading dye instead of the drug) were formulated using a similar procedure. Fig. 1 Graphical representation of preparation scheme of sunitinib malate–loaded PLGA nanoparticles using o/w emulsion solvent evaporation method
Physicochemical Characterization
Physicochemical characterization of developed nanoparticles was carried out using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) techniques ( ). FTIR was done to determine the presence of and types of functional groups in SM. The interaction between the SM and polymer composition as well as encapsulation of SM in nanoparticles was analyzed by FTIR using UATR Two FTIR Spectrometer (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, PerkinElmer spectrum software) at a scanning range of 400–4000 cm −1 . Pure drug, polymer, physical mixture of drug and polymer, and SM-NPs were investigated, and background scans were taken after each triplicate to constitute atmospheric conditions. The results were graphed as a radiation plot of percent transmission through the molecule versus the wavenumber of the detected radiation (cm −1 ).
Thermal analyses of pure SM, physical mixture of SM and PLGA, and SM-NPs were performed using TA Instrument DSC Q-20 (TA Instruments, New Castle, DE USA, Q series Q20-2288-DSC software). Five milligrams of all the three samples was individually placed in an aluminum pan and hermetically sealed. The samples were then separately heated from 30°C to 300°C at a rate of 10°C min −1 in a nitrogen atmosphere at a flow of 50 mL/min. As a reference, an empty aluminum pan was utilized.
Particle Size and Zeta Potential of Nanoparticles
The particle size of nanoparticles was detected based on the dynamic light scattering technique (DLS) using Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK, Zeta Sizer Software Ver. 7.10) at a scattering angle of 90° and 633 nm He-Ne laser light source ( ). At a temperature of 25°C, the size analysis of samples was carried out in triplicate after ten times dilution using double distilled water. Z average and polydispersity index (PDI) were reported.
Zeta potential of nanoparticles was determined based on Smoluchowski equation that considers electrophoretic mobility of the nanoparticles and their backscatter at 90° ( ). The analysis was carried out in triplicate after ten times dilution of nanoparticles using double distilled water using zeta cuvette and Zetasizer Nano ZS 90 (Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK, Zeta Sizer Software Ver. 7.10).
Transmission Electron Microscope
Morphology, shape, and size of the SM-NPs were observed using a transmission electron microscope (TEM) (JEOL JEM 1400 electron microscope with Gaton camera, Peabody, MA, USA). The adequate volume of dispersed nanoparticle sample was retained on EMS formvar support film square grid, 200 Cu, and allowed to air dry for 10 min. Afterwards, it was treated with 2% w / v phosphotungstic acid for negative staining. The samples were visualized with 40,000 magnifications at accelerating voltage of about 120 kV.
Entrapment Efficiency
The prepared nanoparticles were centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5 min to remove the unentrapped drug, followed by centrifugation at 18000 rpm for 20 min to collect the nanoparticulate pellet from the bottom of the Eppendorf tubes. The process was carried out at room temperature. The collected pellet was washed thrice with distilled water to remove traces of free drug that may be adsorbed on the surface. To determine entrapment efficiency and loading efficiency, reconstituted nanoparticles were treated with methanol to extract the loaded SM drug and were quantified using UV spectroscopy (Model: S-2150UV; Cole Parmer Instrument Company) at 432 nm ( λ max) in methanol. $$ {\displaystyle \begin{array}{l}\%\mathrm{Entrapment}\ \mathrm{efficiency}=\frac{\mathrm{Actual}\ \mathrm{amount}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{drug}\ \mathrm{loaded}\ \mathrm{in}\ \mathrm{nanoparticles}}{\mathrm{Actual}\ \mathrm{amount}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{drug}\ \mathrm{used}\ \mathrm{for}\ \mathrm{nanoparticles}\ \mathrm{perparation}}\times 100\\ {}\%\mathrm{Loading}\ \mathrm{Efficiency}=\frac{\mathrm{Amount}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{drug}\ \mathrm{in}\ \mathrm{nanoparticles}}{\mathrm{Total}\ \mathrm{amount}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{nanoparticles}}\times 100\end{array}} $$
Preparation of SM-NP-Incorporated Thermo-Reversible Gel
Thermo-reversible (TR) gels were prepared by slowly dispersing the polymer in aqueous phase in cold condition ( ). To prepare gel, AK036 (methoxy poly (ethylene glycol)-b-polycaprolactone copolymers/mPEG-PCL, PolySciTech, MW ~ 750–2500 Da) polymer was solubilized in distilled water by stirring at 350 rpm at 4°C overnight. The gel was then heated at 80°C for half an hour which can cause the breakdown of the crystalline domains in PCL. Then the gel was allowed to stir back to 4°C at 350 rpm overnight. The phase transition and formation of gel based on the change of temperature were studied. Aqueous solutions of the gel with various concentrations were prepared (10, 20, 30, and 40% w / v ), and they were heated from 10 to 60°C individually. At an interval of each 2°C, the tubes were overturned to examine flow. Following tube inversion, if there is no flow observed, it can be concluded that the solution has achieved gel state. Prepared SM-NPs were suspended in above TR gel at 2–8°C in cold room and gelation temperature was detected by visual inspection.
In Vitro Drug Release Study
The in vitro drug release study for SM from SM-NPs and SM-NP gel was compared with plain drug solution and was studied at 37° ± 0.5°C. In short, drug solution in DMSO, SM-NPs, and SM-NP gel having an equivalent quantity of SM (1 mg/ml) were placed in dialysis tubes (MWCO 12 KDa) and sealed tightly by using dialysis closures. Then, the dialysis tubes were immersed in 20 ml of PBS (pH 7.4) as a release medium comprising 0.1% Tween 80 ( v / v ) ( ). Release medium was allowed to stir at 150 rpm, and the 0.5 mL of samples was withdrawn at 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 12, 24, 48, 72, 96, 120, 144, and 168 h. The volumes were made up with fresh release medium after each sampling. The concentration of SM in a sample was determined by UV spectroscopy at 432 nm after dilution with methanol in a ratio of 1:10. For all the formulations, in vitro release tests were carried out in triplicate and results were described as the cumulative quantity of drug released at each point of time.
Cytotoxicity Study
The MTT assay was carried out to determine the cytotoxicity of SM-NPs as well as of SM-NP gel in comparison with a pure drug solution, in ARPE-19, human retinal pigment epithelial cells. The cells were seeded in 200 μl of DMEM F12 supplemented with 10% FBS in a 96-well plate (Corning, New York) at a seeding density of 5000 cells/well and incubated for 24 h at 37°C in 5% CO 2 atmosphere to allow attachment and growth of the cells ( ). SM drug solution and formulations with various concentrations of SM were prepared by first dissolving SM in DMSO and then diluting them with DMEM F12 medium without FBS. The cells were treated with formulations after 24 h of seeding and incubated for 4 h. After 4 h, the treatment was removed from the cell well and cells were washed three times with sterile 1× PBS to ensure removal of treatment. The cells were then incubated after adding fresh DMEM F12 medium having 10% FBS at 37°C in 5% CO 2 atmosphere for 24 h and 48 h. After 24 h and 48 h, the media were replaced by 100 μl of MTT reagent solution (1 mg/mL) to each well and kept at 37°C in 5% CO 2 atmosphere for 4 h. After 4 h, the MTT reagent was removed and 100 μl of DMSO (Sigma Aldrich, USA) was added to each well to allow the dissolution of formed formazan crystals. The intensity of color produced after the dissolution of formazan crystals was quantified by measuring optical density at 595 nm wavelength by a microtiter plate reader (Spectra MAX 190, Molecular Devices, California, USA). For positive and negative controls, cells were treated with 0.1% Triton X and DMEM F12, respectively. Cell viability was calculated graphically from concentration vs viability curves, considering the optical density of control well as 100% viable.
Cellular Uptake Using Confocal Microscope
To access the cell uptake potential of the nanoparticles and for determining the localization in cell, confocal microscopy was carried out using ARPE-19 cells. All the formulations that include drug formulations, coumarin formulation, and blank were prepared as outlined above ( ). The ARPE-19 cells were seeded at 2 × 10 5 density per well in a six-well plate and incubated for a day to achieve 70% confluency. The cell monolayer was then washed with PBS three times to remove suspended dead cells and aspirated. Each well was treated with the formulation, i.e. , Coumarin 6–loaded nanoparticles along with placebo nanoparticles for comparison (blank). Incubation was carried out with the formulations for a period of 4 h, and subsequently, the medium on the well was aspirated and washed with PBS thrice and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. DAPI was added to the cells for nuclear staining followed by CellMask™ deep red plasma stain for membrane staining and examined under confocal microscope FV1200 (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) at × 60 magnification.
Wound Scratch Assay
Wound healing assay was performed as per the earlier reports to analyze the inhibitory effect of SM and its formulation on VEGF165 (rhVEGF; R&D Systems)-induced angiogenesis ( , ). ARPE-19 cells were seeded and allowed to grow to attain 80% confluency in 24-well plates. Carefully, wounds were made by pipette tip to take out monolayer of cells as a strip. The wounds were created typically with around 300 μm of the average size and 5% or more variation in wound width was considered for the study. To ensure the removal of partially adhered cells on the plates due to the creation of the wound, they were washed with sterile PBS twice. The wells were then treated with 1 μM and 10 μM concentrations of SM-NP gel formulations in DMEM F12 media without FBS. Cell migration was observed by using ZEISS inverted phase-contrast microscope (Axicom 506 mono) with Axicom MRC5-ZEN2pro software and quantified by calculating the area covered by the cells due to migration of cells from the wound edges towards the center area of the wound using ImageJ software. To check the effect of the presence of VEGF in the cell migration, two wells were also kept at above two concentrations and treated with VEGF simultaneously. Further, one well consisted of complete medium and another was treated with VEGF acted as a reference and positive control respectively. Incubation was done for 48 h at 37°C in 5% CO 2 atmosphere. The treated formulations were removed after incubation, and the cells were washed with sterile 1× PBS thrice to ensure removal of treatment. The cells were then treated with 4% paraformaldehyde solution to fix them and were imaged. The width of the wound was measured using images captured by the microscope. Width of the untreated wound at 0 h was taken as 100% and considered as reference, and % area covered for each wound was compared in relation to reference one.
VEGF Inhibition Using ELISA
Human retinal pigmented epithelium ARPE-19 cells were seeded in 24-well plate at a density of 5 × 10 4 cells/mL and allowed to grow for 24 h in DMEM F12 medium supplemented with 10% FBS and were incubated at 37°C in 5% CO 2 atmosphere until wells became confluent. After 24 h, the culture media were replaced by incomplete media, i.e. , DMEM F12 without FBS and treatment with formulation was given. The treatment group consisted of drug solution, SM-NPs, and SM-NP gel, each at equivalent to 10 μM SM concentration and was further incubated for a total period of 144 h. Quantification of the VEGF secretion in the culture media was done by ELISA method using Human VEGF-A Platinum ELISA Kit following the manufacturer’s instructions ( , ). The protein content in the cells was estimated using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit after collecting cell lysate and the by normalizing VEGF secretion to total protein. Samples were read using ELISA plate reader (Spectra MAX 190, Molecular Devices, California, USA) at 450 nm absorbance and 550 nm, and the difference was recorded, followed by calculating inhibition of VEGF secretion using standard curve.
Statistical Analysis
All analyses have been performed in triplicate, and data are represented as mean ± standard deviation, unless otherwise mentioned. Statistical data analysis was carried out using ANOVA and Student’s t test. GraphPad Prism (Version 6, USA) was used for all analyses and p value reported at the level of < 0.0, < 0.01, or < 0.001 at each place.
RESULTS
Physicochemical Characterization
Pure SM drug, physical mixture of SM and PLGA, and SM-NPs were investigated for physicochemical characterization using FTIR and DSC techniques. To study the compatibility of SM with PLGA and to confirm entrapment of SM in formed NPs, FTIR analysis was performed (Fig. 2 ). FTIR spectra of PLGA 50:50 displayed major peaks such as 3465 cm −1 , 3325 cm −1 , between 2979 and 2627 cm −1 , between 1700 and 1850 cm −1 , and between 1050 and 1250 cm −1 . Pure SM drug exhibited strong absorption bands, and the principle peaks were observed at 3322 cm −1 , 2979 cm −1 , 2884 cm −1 , 1669 cm −1 , and 1026 cm −1 . Table I shows all the major peaks obtained at particular wavenumber for PLGA and SM drug individually and corresponding groups ( , , ). These characteristic peaks are retained in the physical mixture of SM drug with PLGA with a broadening effect and a decrease in intensity of principal peaks, whereas, in the case of SM-NP formulation, all characteristics pertaining to SM were absent, indicating the complete encapsulation of drug in the NPs and only a diffused peak throughout the spectra at wavenumber higher than 1300 cm −1 was observed in Fig. 2 . Fig. 2 FTIR spectra of A . SM pure drug, B . SM and PLGA physical mixture, C . PLGA, and D . SM-NPs Table I FTIR Peaks of PLGA Polymer and SM at Specific Wavenumber with Corresponding Groups Sample material Wavenumber (cm −1 ) Corresponding group PLGA 3465 and 3325 O–H 2979–2627 C–H, C–H 3 , and C–H 2 1700–1850 Carbonyl –C = O 1050–1250 C–O SM drug 3322 O–H (acid), N–H 2979 HC=CH (aryl) 2884 C–H (alkyl) 1669 –NH–C=O 1026 C–F
Figure 3 shows the thermal analysis of SM, PLGA, physical mixture, blank NPs, and SM-NPs using DSC technique ( , , ). The nature as well as the physical state of the encapsulated drug in the polymer matrix can have an effect on its release and thus DSC thermograms enabled to identify this nature ( ). SM shows a sharp endothermic peak at around 202°C which indicated its characteristic melting point. That peak was absent in DSC spectrum for SM-NPs confirming the entrapment of SM in NPs and presence of SM as amorphous form. However, the characteristic endothermic peak of SM (~ 182°C) was present in the DSC spectrum of a physical mixture of SM and PLGA. Fig. 3 DSC spectra of SM (sunitinib malate), PLGA, physical mixture, blank nanoparticles, and sunitinib malate nanoparticle formulation
Particle Size and Zeta Potential
The size and PDI of SM-NPs were measured using DLS technique and were found to be of the order of 164.5 ± 5.8 nm with PDI of 0.154 ± 0.008. The low PDI of the SM-NPs exhibited the dispersion homogeneity and uniform distribution of the particle size of the nanoparticles. The mean zeta potential of SM-NPs was determined using a Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS90 and was − 18.27 ± 3.6 mV for the SM-NPs. Figure 4a shows Z average along with the correlation functional plots for SM-NPs. Fig. 4 a Z average of SM-NPs along with the correlation functional plots. b TEM image of SM-NPs at accelerating voltage of 120 kV with × 40,000 magnification
Transmission Electron Microscope
The TEM study showed particle size for the formulated SM-NPs were 140 ± 11 nm (Fig. 4b ). It can be noted that the obtained size suggests the actual size of nanoparticle as opposed to the size obtained using Zetasizer that measures the hydrodynamic size of particles. TEM images demonstrated nanoparticles sizes were in concurrence with the DLS results and were spherical in shape.
Entrapment Efficiency
Entrapment efficiency was calculated by centrifuging the NPs and resuspending the NP pellet in methanol. Entrapment efficiency was found to be 72.0% ± 3.5%. Percent of drug loading was found to be 9.0% ± 0.6%. The encapsulation efficiency of SM in nanoparticles was determined using UV spectroscopy after generating a calibration plot of SM in methanol ( r 2 = 0.9998) at 432 nm ( λ max ).
Preparation of SM-NP-Incorporated Thermo-Reversible Gel
For the preparation of thermo-reversible gel, methoxy poly(ethylene glycol)-b-polycaprolactone copolymers (AK 036, Polyscitech, USA) was used. Temperature-dependent phase transitions of SM-NPs incorporated in AK 036 TR gels with various concentrations were evaluated by visual inspection upon change of temperature from 10°C to 60°C (Fig. 5 ). The 30% w / v TR gel was selected for future studies as its phase transition from liquid to gel took place over 35°C ± 2°C that is the physiologically relevant temperature of the eye. The phase transition of TR gel at 30% w / v concentration from liquid solution to semisolid gel was observed at around 34°C. Fig. 5 Phase transition of TR gel from solution to gel with changing temperature at various concentrations of gelling polymer (phase transition shown by the 30% w / v TR gel depending on the change of temperature is shown in inset images)
In Vitro Drug Release Study
The in vitro release study of SM from drug solution, SM-NPs, and SM-NP gel was carried out by dialysis method using PBS (pH 7.4) as release medium at 37°C ± 2°C for a period of 7 days. Further, to maintain sink condition, Tween 80 (0.1% v / v ) was added to the release medium. Drug was released rapidly into the medium with 80% cumulative release at the end of 3 h from the drug solution. An initial burst release was observed in the NP formulations of around 15.1 ± 3.1% in 1 h which may be due to the release of adhered drug from the surface of NPs. However, SM-NP gel showed extended-release profile with 14.9 ± 1.9% release at the end of first day followed by slow release and showed 52.5 ± 3.6% release content at the end of seven days, while nanoparticles exhibited 29 ± 4.1% and 83.1 ± 2.7% release at the end of 1 and 7 days respectively (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Cumulative drug release of SM from SM solution, SM-NPs, and SM-NP thermo-reversible gel up to 7 days at 37°C in phosphate buffer saline pH 7.4 (mean ± SD, n = 3)
Cytotoxicity Study
The cytotoxicity of the SM drug solution, SM-NPs, and SM-NP gel was studied using the MTT assay in human retinal pigmented epithelium ARPE-19 cell line. Cells were treated in serum-free medium with various concentrations (0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, and 20 μM) of SM solution, placebo NPs, SM-NPs, and SM-NP gel in triplicates for 24 and 48 h. The resulting cell viability was compared with that of the control, which was observed about 100% (Fig. 7 ). Results indicated that the viability of cells was greater than 90% for SM-NP gel, SM-NPs, and blank nanoparticles at 10 μM and 20 μM concentration tested ( p < 0.01), whereas drug solution viability was found to be 83% and 71% respectively at above concentration, thus indicating cell compatibility of the formulation (Fig. 7 ). Fig. 7 Cell viability plots of ARPE-19 cells after treatment of SM drug solution, SM-NPs, and SM-NP gel at a 24 h and b 48 h (mean ± SD, n = 3; ** p < 0.01)
Cellular Uptake Using Confocal Microscope
Fluorescent (Coumarin 6) dye was loaded into the PLGA NPs to evaluate the uptake of NPs upon incubation in ARPE-19 cells at 37°C. Coumarin 6, a hydrophobic dye, was used for this purpose, and Coumarin 6–loaded PLGA NPs were prepared using the similar procedure which was used to prepare SM-NPs by loading Coumarin 6 dye instead of SM drug. Figure 8a shows the uptake of Coumarin 6–loaded PLGA NPs into ARPE 19 cells within 2 h of time frame at 37°C. As can be seen, the cellular uptake of NPs increased with time. The relative mean fluorescence intensity was plotted against time (Fig. 8b ) increased at 15 min, 30 min, and 60 min time points, whereas the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) for 60 min and 120 min time points were comparable ( p < 0.05). The uptake of the NPs by the cells is likely to have occurred via endocytosis. Cells treated with placebo nanoparticles (blank) did not show green fluorescence. Fig. 8 a Cellular uptake of Coumarin 6–loaded PLGA NPs into ARPE-19 cells within 2 h of time frame at 37°C at × 60 magnification (scale bar = 40 μm). b Relative mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) calculated using ImageJ software vs time plot for cellular uptake of Coumarin 6–loaded PLGA NPs in ARPE-19 cells (* p < 0.05)
Wound Scratch Assay
Wound scratch assay was performed for the determination of migratory effect on a cell in the presence of different formulations ( ). As evident from Fig. 9a , for the control group or the untreated cells, a completed recovery of the wound occurred in comparison with the reference group. With the cells treated with different concentrations of either SM solution or SM-NP gel or SM-NP gel in the presence of VEGF, concentration-dependent inhibition of cell migration was observed. The percent wound recovered for various treatment groups was plotted as shown in Fig. 9b which shows that the wound recovery was lowest for SM-NP gel at 10 μM concentration (48 ± 1.9%). Recovery of 80 ± 1.8% was seen at 1 μM concentration for SM solution which was highest among the treated groups. Addition of 100 nM of VEGF165 (rhVEGF; R&D Systems) increased the migration of cells to the greatest extent and hence wound recovery, as seen in Fig. 9a . However, co-treatment of SM-NP gel formulation with VEGF165 hindered the action of VEGF165 as well as inhibited VEGF-induced angiogenic manifestations in ARPE-19 cells and did not significantly improved the cell migration based wound recovery (63 ± 2% and 45 ± 2.5% for 1 μM and 10 μM concentrations respectively). These results indicate that SM-NP gel efficiently and selectively inhibits VEGF-induced angiogenesis in ARPE-19 cells. Fig. 9 a Cell migration images of SM solution, SM-NP gel, and SM-NP gel in the presence of VEGF 165 (scale bar = 100 μ). b Wound recovery at 48 h in comparison with control (untreated) at 0 h for SM solution, SM-NP gel, and SM-NP gel in the presence of VEGF at 1 μM and 10 μM concentrations. *** p < 0.001
VEGF Inhibition Using ELISA
The effect of the SM drug solution, SM-NPs, and SM-NP gel on the activity of VEGF was studied using ARPE-19 cells. Samples were collected after 12, 24, 48, 96, and 144 h of treatment, and the amount of VEGF-A was measured using the Human VEGF-A ELISA kit. %VEGF secretion values are illustrated using the control group value as 100% (Fig. 10 ). VEGF secretion was noticeably reduced by the free SM solution at initial time points of 12 h compared with the NP treatment. SM-NPs and SM-NP gel formulation have similar effects on VEGF-A secretion with p < 0.05 and p < 0.01. ELISA results showed significantly decreased VEGF protein levels after exposure to SM-NPs (10 μM equivalent of SM) in ARPE-19 at 12, 24, 48, 96, and 144 h in comparison with control cells and cells treated with drug solution. Fig. 10 Comparison of VEGF expression levels in ARPE-19 cells at different treatment time points for SM solution, SM-NPs, and SM-NP gel formulation (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01)
DISCUSSION
The treatment alternatives for AMD has gradually shifted to the use of anti-VEGF agents or anti-angiogenic agents and investigating their delivery methods for maximizing the therapeutic outcome of reversing visual loss and improving patient compliance ( , ). However, the therapeutic limitations associated with the regimen include medical and economic constrain, need for repeated administration, and adverse effects such as endophthalmitis. Anti-angiogenic agents inhibit the neovascular proliferation and vascular permeability by selectively inhibiting the binding of VEGF to its receptor as well as the circulating VEGF molecules. Studies have also been carried out to deliver these agents by systemic route; however, the associated adverse effects of proteinuria, thromboembolism, and hypertension have greatly limited their use ( , , ). Thus, the need for local delivery of these agents has aroused and culminated in the use of intravitreal route of instillation for these agents. However, this route present s multiple challenges to the clinician for determining the drug of choice and selection of dosing schedule. The delivery systems investigated include implants, nano-systems prepared using several non-biodegradable and biodegradable polymers, and nano-devices with innovative design with few of the extended-release implants approved by the FDA ( , , ). However, no such clinically viable alternative s are available for anti-VEGF agents. Of the biodegradable systems, the use of nanoparticles for delivery of anti-VEGF agents for indications such as anti-cancer has been widely investigated; however, not much evidence for their use in AMD is found. Thus, the purpose of this study was to improve the performance of drug for use in AMD by designing biocompatible and biodegradable NPs system that improves bioavailability with the sustained-release property. PLGA being biocompatible and biodegradable, PLGA NP system could serve as a viable alternative for intravitreal injection of anti-VEGF agents for delivery drug at the target site with the prolonged-release profile. In this study, PLGA nanoparticles incorporating SM were prepared using emulsion solvent evaporation method (Fig. 1 ) and evaluated for their in vitro performance. As a delivery system to increase the longevity in the physiological environment, the prepared nanoparticles were incorporated in the thermo-reversible gel.
As a first step of evaluating the delivery system, formulation compatibility behavior was investigated. Incompatibility among the polymer and drug can be determined from the shifts in the transition temperature of individual components in DSC and by the generation of additional peaks in infrared spectra. Further, on successful entrapment of a drug in the polymeric matrix, crystalline peaks of the drug get diminished. DSC and FTIR were carried out to confirm the above theories. Results suggested encapsulation of the drug in nanoparticles with the disappearance of the characteristic crystalline peak of the drug at 202°C and the comparative similarity of the spectra between blank nanoparticles and sunitinib malate nanoparticles. The characteristic peak of the drug in FTIR at 3322 cm −1 , 2979 cm −1 , and 1669 cm −1 was also absent in the formulation thus suggesting encapsulation of drug in the polymer. The above studies also indicate that the drug and polymer formulation components are compatible (Figs. 2 and 3 ). These results are in agreement with previously published data ( ). Size and charge of the nanoparticles are important physical parameters that determine their fate. The combined effect of size of the nanoparticles was in nano-range (164.5 ± 5.8 nm) (Fig. 4 ), and high negative zeta potential (− 18.27 ± 3.6 mV) prevents aggregation among the nanoparticles and stabilizes against electrostatic interaction forces. It also prevents interaction with serum components and protein adsorption. Such interactions lead to the formulation being up-taken by tissue macrophages and subsequent degradation by metabolizing enzymes ( ). TEM images confirmed that the nanoparticles were spherical in shape and were not in aggregate. The incorporation of nanoparticle in the gel formulation was effective in providing sustained release characteristic that was essential in decreasing instillation frequency. The polycaprolactone blocks of Polyvivo AK36 imparts longevity to the formulation after administration at the target site due to slow degradation. The SM-NPs were suspended in 30% w / v of TR gel as its phase transition from liquid to gel took place over physiologically relevant temperatures. From the study of temperature-dependent phase change of various concentrations of TR gel, it was found that as the concentration of TR gel was increased from 10 to 40%, a broader range of temperature was observed in which gelling of solution was attained and stayed in gel phase from liquid (solution) phase. The 20% TR gel also showed phase change from liquid to gel in physiological temperature range. However, 30% concentration was selected as a final formulation because it could sustain the release of drug to the greater extent when compared with 20% w / v of TR gel (data not shown) as well as has a broader temperature range in which it stays in gel phase (Fig. 5 ). The concentration of TR gel more than 30% w / v showed higher viscosity when in solution phase, presented syringeability issues and thus were not selected as it would not allow easy intravitreal injection. Formation of nanoparticles entangles the drug molecule in their matrices and thus entraps them. Once entrapped, the release is governed by surface erosion of the matrix and such release could further be controlled by loading the nanoparticles in gelled matrix. Thus, the use of biocompatible gel could be favorable in achieving the sustained release of drug for improving therapeutic outcomes.
In vitro release behavior of the formulation is important in correlating with the in vivo behavior of the formulations ( ). Unlike other body parts, pH at the eye is neutral and hence release study was performed at pH 7.4 and supplemented with 0.1% ( v / v ) of Tween 80 solution ( ). The use of Tween 80 was to favor sink condition and enhance solubilization potential of the medium. As evident from Fig. 6 , the SM solution presented no resistance to solubilization or release into the media and showed 80% ± 2.5% cumulative release within an hour. This implies that solution dosage form would rapidly release a pool of drug at the site, out of which only a fraction would be absorbed or available for therapeutic effect and most of the drug would get metabolized. For SM-NPs and SM-NP gel formulation, there was a significant ( p < 0.05) difference in the release behavior with gel form exhibiting slower release profile compared with NP formulation. This may be due to the additional diffusional barrier presented by incorporating NPs in a gel matrix. From the relative comparison of the release profiles of NP gel against NPs, it was deduced that NP gel release rate was in the range of 1.4 to 2.2-fold lower compared with NP release rate at different time points over the entire release period. For release kinetics, SM drug solution followed first-order drug release with R 2 of 0.9683; however, SM-NPs followed the Higuchi model with R 2 of 0.9845. This implies that the release mechanism is determined by the diffusion of drug through the polymeric gel matrix and is time dependent. The MTT results indicate that the nanoparticulate formulation and its gelled formulation both were less cytotoxic than the solution form of drug suggesting safety of the formulations (Fig. 7 ). It is evident from the viability results that there is dose-dependent cytotoxic potential of plain drug solution at a higher concentration of 20 μM with 25–30% of viability lost at 24 h and 48 h respectively. However, for SM-NPs and SM-NP gel formulations, the cell viability remained greater than 90% indicating the formulations were not exhibitinga toxic effect on ARPE-19 cells. At 1, 10, and 20 μM concentration of SM-NPs there was non-significant ( p < 0.01) difference in % cell viability at the end of 48 h time point. This lower cytotoxic potential of the formulation is an important consideration that was exhibited due to the use of PLGA/PCL ( ) as matrix-forming agents and is approved polymer by US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and hence most widely used biocompatible polymer in drug delivery. Furthermore, the sustained release of drug from the NP formulations reinstates equilibrium between the amount of drug and number of cells exposed to the released quantity of formulation at a particular point of time thus maximizing the uptake and minimizing the undue drug overload to the cells. The time-dependent increase in the fluorescence of the nanoparticles indicates that the mechanism of uptake may be mediated by interaction with receptor and as the ARPE-19 cells express VEGF receptor, endocytosis can be the most rational mechanism to expect for the cellular uptake ( ). The relative MFIs at 15, 30, and 60 min were 1.8 ± 0.2 % , 4.6 ± 0.3 %, and 6.5 ± 0.3% respectively which suggested that the cumulative uptake of the nanoparticles and drug load in the cells increased as a function of time. Furthermore, the relative MFI at 120 min was 6.6 ± 0.2% which was non-significant ( p < 0.05) with respect to the uptake at 60-min duration and suggested that no further uptake could have taken place or there was a saturation of the receptor-mediated uptake (Fig. 8 ). Angiogenesis involves a number of synchronized events of the cells that include their proliferation, migration, and morphogenesis ( ). The angiogenic potential of the cells can be studied and demonstrated by cell-based migration assay. A quantitative evaluation of inhibition of cell migration substantiates the effectiveness of NP formulation and can be extrapolated to in vivo behavior as well. The formulation with the highest efficacy will have the lowest recovery in cell migration and vice versa . Cell migration further is an integral part of cell metastasis ( ). Reports on cancer cell metastasis have suggested VEGF promotes cell migration and treatment with anti-proliferative agents reduces the migration rates and hence they are an ideal target for therapy ( ). Taking into consideration the viability of cells according to Fig. 7 and 10 μM equivalent concentration of SM-NPs was selected as highest screened. Wound scratch assay suggested (Fig. 9 ) a significant effect ( p < 0.001) of SM-NP treatment with VEGF on ARPE-19 cell migration compared with SM-NPs. Further, compared with the drug solution, the wound recovery observed was 20% lower for SM-NPs suggesting that the formulation exhibited anti-proliferative effect. As already mentioned, there was concentration-dependent cell proliferation inhibition observed for the cells treated with nanoparticle formulation. To confirm that the inhibition of proliferation was due to the inhibition of VEGF activity , ARPE-19 cells were treated with exogenous VEGF along with NP formulation treatment and wound recovery was monitored. The inhibition of cell migration in these co-treatment regimens confirmed the effectiveness of the drug entrapped in the nanoparticle formulation. Finally, to confirm the expression levels of VEGF levels in the ARPE-19 cells, ELISA test was performed on the various treatment groups. Although from the three-treatment group involving SM solution, SM-NPs, and SM-NP gel, the drug solution exhibited strongest inhibition (56 ± 3%) of VEGF levels at initial time point of 12 h compared with the other two (72 ± 3% and 83 ± 4% for SM-NPs and SM-NP gel respectively) (Fig. 10 ); it showed weak control at subsequent time points. This may be due to the initial high level of free drug available to the cells due to solution form, and that can also be correlated to the release profile of the formulation. However, in the case of nanoparticle formulation and its gel, there was an initial low level of VEGF control which at later time points became stronger as the drug release from the matrix occurred over longer duration. At the end of 48 h, the expression levels for the nanoparticles and gel formulation were almost 50% and 60% respectively whereas those in solution-treated cells displayed no inhibition (90% VEGF expression levels). Herein, a point to note is the higher inhibitory effect of nanoparticle formulation compared with its gelled incorporated form having significant differences at 12 h and 24 h whereas the two groups showed non-significant differences at 48, 96, and 144 h ( p < 0.01). This may be due to slower release of drug from the gel matrix compared with its free nanoparticle form. However, taking into consideration that the NP-based gel formulation will sustain the release of drug from the formulation for even longer period, these expression levels are expected to sustain at subsequent time points leading to effective control over in VEGF expressed in the treatment group. Overall, the drug-loaded NPs showed promising results and may be useful for the treatment AMD.
CONCLUSION
Sunitinib-loaded PLGA nanoparticles with a size of 164.5 ± 5.8 nm and Entrapment efficiency of 72.0% ± 3.5% were successfully developed and tested in vitro in human ocular epithelial cells demonstrating its usefulness in ocular delivery of the drug to treat neovascularization-associated diseases. As a prominent requirement for intravitreal delivery to be effective is delivering sufficient amount of therapeutic agent at the site of action along with sustained release, the prepared drug-loaded PLGA NP-based gel formulation exhibiting thermo-reversible property may prove to be an ideal alternative. The nanoparticulate gel formulation was non-cytotoxic to the cells and displayed effective inhibition of VEGF expression levels. The developed nanoparticulate gel formulation could thus enhance the therapeutic potential of the sunitinib in comparison with the oral dosage forms that exhibit meager efficacy in the diseased condition. Thus, the intravitreal instillation of the prepared nanoparticle-based thermo-gelling formulation presents an attractive strategy and can be further investigated in vivo for determining the efficacy of this formulation.