INTRODUCTION
Understanding aerosol deposition in preclinical species is critical to understanding total pulmonary dose and regional dose within safety and efficacy studies. The deposition fraction of inhaled materials in mice, rats, dogs, and primates has been characterized and is used to calculate pulmonary doses in non-clinical studies ( , , , ). As new animal models of safety and efficacy emerge, characterization of deposition patterns is required in each species in order to provide a basis for inhaled dose calculations ( ).
Ferrets are now a common preclinical species due to their use as an animal model of efficacy and safety for influenza infection, cystic fibrosis, and other diseases ( , , , ). Several inhalation exposure systems have been developed and utilized for inhalation exposures with ferrets ( , ). In parallel, inhalation therapies are being developed to treat influenza in ferret disease models ( , , ). At the current time, there are no peer-reviewed publications that describe the deposition of inhaled aerosols in ferrets. Therefore, there is a need to determine the deposition and deposition patterns of inhaled materials in ferrets to enable an understanding of the relationship between dose, efficacy, and exposure following inhalation.
Well-designed and controlled SPECT/CT studies are the gold standard in the characterization of inhaled product deposition ( ). Further, strengthening the utility of preclinical imaging studies is the ability to apply the same image acquisition and analysis methods from a clinical setting to preclinical data sets. Therefore, a preclinical ferret deposition study was conducted with a radiolabeled aqueous-based formulation and a radiolabeled dry powder formulation. The dry powder formulation was delivered at two different aerosol concentrations. This enabled the interpretation of the exposure dose across both duration and aerosol concentration changes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Liquid Formulation Radiolabeling
A liquid formulation (PUR006) consisting of 4.7% CaCl 2 ( w / w ) and 0.3% NaCl ( w / w ) was radiolabeled with sulfur colloid and 99m Tc. The amount of 99m Tc added to each nebulizer was targeted at 100 mCi. The sulfur colloid preparation was conducted as per the instructions in the sulfur colloid kit (Pharmalucence).
Dry Powder Radiolabeling
The dry powder formulation PUR113 with diethylene triamine pentacetic acid (DTPA) was received from Pulmatrix. Radiolabeling was conducted by first evaporating the 99m Tc (received in saline) to dryness with a speed vac. The PUR113 + DTPA was then added to the dried 99m Tc and mixed with 1 mL of isopropyl alcohol. The approximate ratios of PUR113 + DTPA to 99m Tc were 0.5 g of PUR113 + DTAP to ~ 250 mCi of 99m Tc. The suspension of PUR113 + DTPA and IPA was then mildly agitated and evaporated under a gentle stream of nitrogen prior to aerosol generation. The resulting labeled formulation composition ( w / w ) was leucine (10%), calcium lactate (58.3%), NaCl (31.2%), and DTPA (0.5%).
Nose-Only Inhalation Exposures
All animal procedures were conducted under approved IACUC protocols and were well tolerated for all animals regardless of exposure conditions or formulations.
Liquid Formulation Nose-Only Inhalation Exposures
Radiolabeled liquid formulation (PUR006) exposures were conducted using a 24-port ferret nose-only flow past exposure system, similar to those used in previous rodent nose-only deposition studies ( ). The aerosols were generated with two Pari LC Sprint nebulizers, operated with an inlet pressure of 15 psi. In order to achieve the target particle size of ~ 3.5 μm, humidified forced air dilution was plumbed through the top of the Pari LC Sprint nebulizers at a flow rate of 6.5 L/min. The chamber exhaust flow rate was maintained at ~ 15 L/min. Exposures were conducted with one ferret at a time for 5 min.
Dry Powder Formulation Nose-Only Inhalation Exposures
The radiolabeled dry powder formulation (PUR113 + DTPA) aerosols were conducted into a 24-port ferret nose-only flow past exposure system. The aerosols were generated with a Palas Rotating Brush Generator (RBG), operated with an outlet flow rate of 19 L/min. The chamber exhaust flow rate was maintained at ~ 20 L/min. Exposures were conducted with one ferret at a time for 5 min. The exposures were conducted with two different target total aerosol concentrations, 0.185 and 0.555 mg/L.
Radiolabeling Validation
Following the development of the radiolabeling procedure for each formulation, the radiolabeling methods were validated by conducting repeated testing over different days to confirm the validity and repeatability of the radiolabel. In these studies, the relationship between the mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) and activity median aerodynamic diameter (AMAD) was evaluated with a cascade impactor, with six replicates for each formulation.
The particle size distribution of the liquid aerosol formulations was measured and validated with a Mercer seven-stage cascade impactor. The Mercer cascade impactor was operated at a flow rate of 2 L/min. All substrates (cups) were analyzed by differential weight analysis and by a dose calibrator to obtain both mass and activity data, respectively.
Dry powder aerosol properties were determined using a next-generation impactor (NGI). Powders were aerosolized into the ferret dosing system using an RBG and powder was collected at 30 L/min into the NGI positioned at breathing zone of the exposure system. Particle size was determined by both gravimetric (Shimadzu AUW220D) and/or radioactivity analysis (Capintac Instrument Inc. Model CRC-12).
Study Design
The study was originally designed to be a complete cross-over study between the three arms in which all ferrets would be exposed to the liquid aerosol and the low- and high-dose dry powder aerosol in a randomized design with 1 week wash-out period. Real-time data analysis determined that animals would require euthanasia prior to image acquisition. Therefore, the PUR006 and PUR113 high-dose arms were conducted as a cross over and PUR113 low-dose arm was conducted with four additional animals. Scientifically, the image analysis data indicated that the time required to acquire the image and the biological “movement” of the radiolabel during that acquisition time impacted the data analysis.
During all exposures, both an impactor and aerosol filter samples were collected from which the AMAD and the radioactivity aerosol concentration were determined for each exposure and used during image analysis for each ferret.
Image Acquisition/Analysis
For PUR006, immediately following exposure ferrets were transferred to inhalation isoflurane anesthesia, while for the PUR113 + DTPA exposures, the ferrets were sacrificed immediately following the exposures prior to image acquisition. All animals were imaged on the high-resolution small-animal SPECT/CT system (NanoSPECT/CT™, Bioscan, Inc.). SPECT/CT imaging was conducted to acquire data from the tip of the nose to just below the lungs of the ferret. This acquisition location was selected based on the physical length of the ferret and the field of view of the SPECT/CT. As a result, the data are only presented with a focus on the respiratory tract.
Image analysis was conducted with VivoQuant (InVicro, LLC, software version 1.14) by drawing region of interests (ROI) around each of the desired body regions. Specifically, these included the muzzle (external), oropharynx, laryngopharynx, trachea, bifurcation, lung, and heart.
In order to facilitate direct comparison between animal exposures at different times and with different radioactivity aerosol concentrations, the inhaled dose was calculated based on measured actual aerosol concentration (in terms of radioactivity), exposure time (in minutes), and the estimated respiratory minute volume (RMV; calculated with actual body weights via Alexander, et al. ( )). The fraction of the radioactivity in each region (following decay corrections) was then calculated by normalization of the radioactivity in the region of interest by inhaled dose. In this manner, each animal was evaluated individually based on their individual parameters. The average and standard deviation for each region were then determined for the four animals in each treatment group. The calculation of the deposition fraction (from the image analysis) was performed as previously described ( ).
Example calculation: Animal body weight = 0.87 kg, radioactivity aerosol concentration = 0.51 mCi/L, RMV calculated = 540 mL/min, 5-min exposure, lung region measured 132 mCi. $$ {\displaystyle \begin{array}{l}\mathrm{Inhaled}\ \mathrm{dose}=540\ \mathrm{mL}/\min \times 0.51\ \mathrm{mCi}/\mathrm{L}\times 5\ \min =1380\ \mathrm{mCi}.\\ {}\mathrm{Lung}\ \mathrm{region}\ \mathrm{fraction}=132\ \mathrm{mCi}/1380\ \mathrm{mCi}\times 100\ \left(\mathrm{convert}\ \mathrm{to}\ \mathrm{percent}\right)=9.58\%.\end{array}} $$
Statistical Analysis
Two-tailed t tests were performed with Graph Pad Prism (version 5.04). When appropriate, PUR006 vs. PUR113 high-dose t tests were conducted as paired tests. All testing utilized a p value of < 0.05 used for significance.
RESULTS
Liquid Formulation Radiolabel Validation
The PUR006 radiolabeling validation is summarized in Table I and Fig. 1 . In order to quantify the quality of the radiolabel, the mean ratio of the fine particle fraction (FPF) before and after radiolabeling was determined and compared to the recommended 0.85–1.18 range ( ). The ratio of the FPF of the 99m Tc solution to that of the unlabeled PUR006 was determined to be 0.99 and the ratio of the FPF of the radiolabeled PUR006 to that of the unlabeled drug was determined to be 0.99. Both meet working group recommendations and indicate a high quality of the radiolabel. Table I Radiolabeled Validation Results. Shown as Average and SD of the N = 6 replicates Material Pre-processing MMAD (μm, with GSD) Post-processing (radiolabeled) AMAD (μm, with GSD) Post-processing (radiolabeled) MMAD (μm, with GSD) Fine particle fraction ratio PUR006 2.78 (1.82) 2.56 (1.80) 2.75 (1.73) 0.99 PUR113 3.61 (2.03) 5.61 (2.87) 4.24 (1.87) 1.09 PUR113 + DTPA 2.89 (1.67) 2.54 (1.63) 2.56 (1.80) 1.12 Fig. 1 Representative histogram of the radiolabeling validation studies with PUR006. Shown as average % of total measured mass or % of total measured radioactivity with error bars as standard deviation of the six replicates
Dry Powder Formulation Radiolabel Validation
The initial effort of radiolabeling PUR113 dry powder attempted to radiolabel the PUR113 after dry powder manufacturing (post-processing label). In this process, the 99m Tc was evaporated to dryness, the PUR113 and 99m Tc were suspended in IPA, and the IPA was evaporated off via a gentle stream of nitrogen. The results for this radiolabeling method are shown in Table I . This process resulted in an increase in the MMAD of the labeled PUR113 formulation and a poor correlation between the MMAD and AMAD of the labeled material, making it unsuitable for use.
In an alternative approach, DTPA was added to the PUR113 spray-drying feedstock prior to dry powder manufacturing (in-process labeling). This process resulted in a spray-dried PUR113 + DTPA formulation with the DTPA incorporated into the dry particles at 0.5% ( w / w ). The same radiolabeling procedure was repeated and the MMAD/AMAD measured (Table I and Fig. 2 ). In contrast to the radiolabeling of PUR113 without DTPA, the in-process–labeled PUR113 + DTPA formulation met the necessary criteria for use. The ratio of the FPF of the 99m Tc to PUR113 was determined to be 1.09 and the ratio of the FPF of the PUR113 + DTPA to that of PUR113 was determined to be 1.12. Both meet the working group recommendations and indicate a high quality of the radiolabel. Fig. 2 Representative histogram of the radiolabeling validation studies with PUR113 +DTPA. Shown as average % of total measured mass or % of total measured radioactivity with error bars as standard deviation of the six replicates
Image Analysis
An example SPECT/CT image is shown in Fig. 3 . The images from each animal from all exposures were quantified to determine the radioactivity in each of the defined ROIs. The radioactivity in each individual region of each animal was then used to build group average and conduct statistics and compare the relative deposition fraction in each compartment. Results of this analysis are shown in Table II and Fig. 4 . As the pulmonary deposition fraction in ferrets is a key parameter driving the utilization of ferrets as an animal model for inhalation drug development, deposition in the different respiratory ROIs (oropharynx, laryngopharynx, trachea, bifurcation, and lung) were combined and analyzed. For PUR006, approximately 32% of the aerosol is deposited in the respiratory fraction, whereas for PUR113, respiratory tract deposition ranged between 10 and 15% (Fig. 5 ). This difference was largely driven by higher PUR006 deposition in the oral/nasal regions relative to deposition of the dry powder formulations in the same regions. Fig. 3 Example reconstructed image of a ferret SPECT/CT image. The brightest color (white) indicates the greatest amount of radioactivity, while the darker colors (blue/purple) indicate lower levels of radioactivity Table II Summary of the Fraction of Inhaled Dose in Each ROI for All Three Aerosols. Presented as Average with (Standard Deviation; n = 4) Aerosol Muzzle Oropharynx Laryngo-pharynx Trachea Bifurcation Lung Heart PUR006 9.64 (7.02) 16.03 (13.32) 6.66 (1.54) 0.59 (0.95) 0.01 (0.01) 9.08 (1.74) 0.53 (0.11) PUR113 low 2.25 (2.96) 0.27 (0.19) 4.14 (1.81) 0.80 (0.19) 0.07 (0.01) 5.33 (2.33) 7.77 (5.15) PUR113 high 7.12 (6.08) 0.52 (0.22) 5.88 (2.32) 1.63 (0.71) 0.19 (0.09) 6.81 (2.55) 2.19 (0.69) Fig. 4 Regional deposition fraction for the ROIs evaluated. Bars represent mean and SEM for each group ( n = 3) Fig. 5 Pulmonary deposition (trachea, bifurcation, and lungs) and respiratory tract deposition (oropharynx, laryngopharynx, trachea, bifurcation, and lungs) for all three formulations (PUR006, PUR113 – Low and PUR113 –High). Bars represent mean and SEM for each group ( n = 3)
With the liquid PUR006 aerosol (2.80 μm MMAD), a high fraction of the dose was deposited on the muzzle (9.6%) or in the nasal-oral (oropharynx plus laryngopharynx) cavity (22.7%). A small fraction of the total dose (9.08%) was detected in the lungs. Pulmonary delivery relative to the total was similarly low for both the low- and high-dose PUR113 aerosols (2.33 and 2.59 μm MMAD, respectively), with 5.33% and 6.81% deposited in the lungs. Compared to the liquid aerosol, significantly less drug deposited in the oral cavity when the dry powder formulation was used at both the low-dose (5.36%) and high-dose (7.16%).
DISCUSSION
Deposition analysis was conducted following nose-only inhalation of a liquid formulation (PUR006), a high-concentration dry powder formulation (PUR113–0.555 mg/L), and a low-concentration dry powder formulation (PUR113–0.185 mg/L) in ferrets. Immediately following the PUR006 radiolabeled aerosol exposures, ferrets were anesthetized with isoflurane for acquisition of SPECT/CT data. Following both high- and low-dose PUR113 exposure, ferrets were immediately sacrificed for SPECT/CT imaging. SPECT/CT images were analyzed to determine the radioactivity and deposition fraction in the following ROIs: muzzle (defined as within the body), oropharynx, laryngopharynx, trachea, bifurcation area, lung, and heart.
Prior to nose-only inhalation exposures, radiolabeling methods were developed and validated for each formulation. Radiolabeling was shown to meet the working group guidelines recommended for the analysis of both total and regional analysis ( ). The PUR006 radiolabeling was conducted with 99m Tc sulfur colloid. The dry powder formulation was radiolabeled through the incorporation of DTPA into the spray drying manufacturing process in order to radiolabel with 99m Tc from evaporation of IPA.
The particle size for the PUR006 and PUR113 aerosols was similar in size and ranged from 2.5 to 2.8 μm MMAD. Both aerosols were polydisperse and therefore reflect the majority of pharmaceutical aerosols. The lung deposition fraction for the PUR006 aerosol was ~ 9%, which is in the range often assumed for deposition fraction in small animals, however, this deposition fraction is nearly double that observed in rats for a similarly sized liquid aerosol ( ). Ferrets have a significantly longer trachea than rats, raising the possibility that a higher degree of deposition could be observed in the trachea of ferrets versus rats, therefore indirectly decreasing the lung deposition fraction. However, comparatively low levels of drug deposition were noted in both the trachea and the tracheal bifurcation in the ferret ( ), raising another potentially contributing factor to the increased lung deposition shown in ferrets, relative to rats.
Within the formulations studied, the lung deposition fraction was lower for both the dry powder doses compared to the liquid aerosol, with the difference between the low-dose and the liquid formulation reaching statistical significance. Typically, the deposition fraction within one species is driven by the particle size (in MMAD) of the aerosol, however, in this instance, the particle sizes for the liquid and dry powder aerosols were similar in both MMAD and GSD.
The trachea deposition fraction analysis showed similar deposition across formulations without any specific trends. Interestingly, analysis showed that the PUR113 high dose resulted in an increased deposition fraction in the bifurcation area compared to both PUR113 low dose and PUR006, however, deposition in this area was low relative to other ROIs. Similarly, PUR113 low dose resulted in an increased bifurcation area deposition over the PUR006 formulation. It is interesting to note that despite differences in specific regions of the lung and bifurcation, when deposition in the trachea, bifurcation, and lung (pulmonary region) are summed, the deposition for each formulation is similar (Fig. 5 ).
Despite similar deposition in the pulmonary region between formulations, deposition in the respiratory tract (defined as the sum of the oropharynx, laryngopharynx, trachea, bifurcation area, and lung) was significantly different between the liquid and dry powder aerosols. This may be due to enhanced powder deposition on the exterior of the animals (primarily near the muzzle), potentially due to electrostatic effects since the respiratory tract accounted for only 15.03 ± 4.32% of the field of view for PUR113 high aerosol concentration, but 32.36 ± 12.59% for PUR006. This is further reflected by the fact that the PUR113 respiratory tract deposition, between the different doses, was not statistically different ( p = 0.14). Alternatively, this difference may also be the result of hygroscopic growth of the dry powders that alters their deposition pattern or a result from a higher propensity of the liquid aerosol to deposit in the oral cavity. Notably, oropharynx deposition was 16.03% for PUR006, but only 0.27–0.53% for the dry powder formulation, however, no statistically significant difference between formulations was found for the deposition fraction of the muzzle, oropharynx, and laryngopharynx. Note that while the deposition in the heart was found to be increased for PUR113 high dose, since this is not a site of primary deposition, it was not considered to be biologically relevant within the context of inhalation deposition.
Overall these data serve to provide a foundation for the deposition patterns of inhaled aerosols in ferrets. As the ferret continues utilization as a non-clinical species for inhalation, additional analysis of deposition across the standard range of respiratory aerosols (1–5 μm MMAD) should be assessed. These additional data would augment the current data and address potential differences caused by the anatomy of the ferret and differences in formulations. The current study data can be used in the calculation of regional dose, pulmonary dose, and deposited dose for future ferret inhalation safety and efficacy studies.