INTRODUCTION
Propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol) is the most popular general anesthetic having high lipophilicity (log p = 4.16) and lower aqueous solubility (154 μg/ml) ( ). Its highly lipophilic nature enhances its permeability across the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and thus helps in the rapid induction of anesthesia ( ). It has a high clearance rate and short elimination half-life which results in less or no accumulation in the body, which in turn helps in a rapid recovery from anesthesia ( ). Along with these advantages, propofol has also shown rare incidents of side effects such as nausea, vomiting, and headache as compared to other general anesthetics ( , ). All these qualities make propofol an excellent general anesthetic for induction and maintenance of anesthesia.
Despite such excellent qualities, propofol cannot be given in the form of an aqueous salt solution like other intravenous anesthetics because of the lone ionizable hydroxyl functional group at ortho position having a pKa of 11, making it unsuitable for forming a salt in solutions ( ). The high lipophilicity and poor aqueous solubility make it miscible with only oils and organic solvents. Considering this as a challenge, propofol has been formulated by solubilizing it in Cremophor EL. However, due to anaphylactic reactions associated with Cremophor EL, this formulation was withdrawn from the market and subsequently reformulated as an oil-in-water emulsion using 10% w / v soybean oil, containing disodium edetate as a preservative. This emulsified formulation was approved by the FDA and has been in clinical use ever since ( ). The generic formulation for the same, having sodium metabisulfite as a preservative, has also been approved by USFDA and is also in use ( , ). Although these formulations have achieved considerable popularity and success in the market, its usage has some limits because of the concomitant drawbacks like instability of emulsion on storage; pain upon injection due to un-encapsulated propofol, which is available in free form to produce pain at the injection site; and chances of hyperlipidemia on long-term intensive care unit sedation due to large amount of lipid content and risk of extrinsic microbial contamination on multiple use because of high nutrient content, i.e. , lecithin and soybean oil ( , ). Although the preservatives like disodium edetate and sodium metabisulfite have been used in the marketed formulations for preventing microbial growth, they have been associated with side effects like hypocalcemia in the case of disodium edetate and allergic reactions in the case of sodium metabisulfite ( , , , ).
Numerous attempts have been made so far to overcome these limitations associated with this soybean oil–based nanoemulsion, like reducing the soybean oil content ( ); polymeric micelles ( , ); microemulsions using medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs) ( , , , ); liposomes ( ); complexation with cyclodextrin ( , ); and formation of water-soluble prodrug (Fospropofol) ( ). All these developed formulations apparently overcome some of the limitations associated with marketed formulation but are left with some other complications instead. In the case of micelles and microemulsions, the use of large quantities of surfactant results in more amount of propofol in the surfactant solution which causes more pain on injection ( ). Cyclodextrins have been associated with adverse hemodynamic effects ( ), whereas water-soluble prodrug has a different mechanism and slower onset of action as compared to propofol ( ). Also, in the case of lipid-free formulation of propofol, Dutta et al . found that the propofol concentration in lungs was significantly higher compared to the emulsion formulation because the emulsion protects propofol from a high first pass sequestration by the lung, possibly by maintaining more propofol in the central vasculature and thereby reduces the lung toxicity ( ). All these findings suggest that although propofol is an excellent anesthetic and sedative, it has to be formulated in an ideal vehicle to bypass the discussed drawbacks. Thus, there is a dire need to develop a new lipid-based formulation of propofol that is devoid of some or all of the undesirable features of the commercially available lipid-based formulation. On this background, it was hypothesized that use of lipids in which propofol has more partitioning will help in reducing the free propofol in the system along with total lipid load and thereby reducing the chances of hyperlipidemia and pain on injection. Also, replacement of soybean oil with other long-chain or medium-chain fatty acids/triglycerides and lecithin with other synthetic surfactants having inherent antimicrobial activity may not only overcome the problem of microbial contamination but also reduce the risk of adverse effects associated with added preservatives.
Lipid nanoparticles are a carrier system with many desirable features like the ability to encapsulate lipophilic drugs in a solid particulate matrix, biodegradability, low toxicity, and industrial scalability ( , , ). Nanostructured lipid carrier (NLC) is the second generation of lipid-based nanoparticles which are composed of a solid lipid, oil, and surfactant ( ). Solid lipids have a perfect crystalline structure and have fewer imperfections; incorporation of oil makes it imperfect and creates more space for the accommodation of drug into the system ( ). This phenomenon not only reduces the lipid content but also helps to encapsulate more amount of propofol which ultimately reduce the chances of hyperlipidemia and pain on injection caused because of free propofol ( ).
Hence, the main aim of this study was to develop a suitable nanostructured lipid carrier system for propofol with maximum loading capacity into a lesser amount of lipid and evaluate the same for its free propofol content, pain on injection, anesthetic potential, pharmacokinetics, stability, and antimicrobial effectiveness concerning a marketed formulation. The marketed formulation utilized in the present study was Neorof® a generic formulation of Diprivan® by Neon Laboratories Ltd. Mumbai, India. Neorof® is an oil-in-water emulsion having 1% w / v propofol, 10% w / v soybean oil, and 1.2% w / v egg lecithin as an emulsifier, with 2.25% w / v glycerol as tonicity-adjusting agent, sodium hydroxide to adjust pH, and 0.005% w / v disodium edetate as a preservative.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Propofol was generously provided by Neon Laboratories, Mumbai, India. Glyceryl distearate (Precirol® ATO 5), glyceryl dibehenate (Compritol™ 888 ATO), and caprylic/capric triglyceride (Labrafac™ Lipophile WL1349) were obtained from Gattefosse, France. Cetyl palmitate (MONECOL®-PC), glyceryl monostearate (SOFTEMUL® NSE), glyceryl tristearate (MONEGYL® T18), and glyceryl tripalmitate (SOFTEMUL® TP) were obtained from Mohini Organics Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai, India. Sesame oil was provided by Silverline Chemicals, India. Soybean oil and Span 20 were provided by Croda Chemicals, USA. Lutrol F68 and Kolliphor HS 15 were gifted by BASF, Germany. Captex 300 and Capmul MCM C8 were gifted from ABITEC Corporation, USA. Oleic acid and Tween 80 were purchased from S. D. Fine Chemical, Mumbai, India. Glycerol was purchased from Merck Specialties Pvt. Ltd., India. All other reagents and chemicals used were of analytical reagent grade.
Components Selection
NLCs are mainly composed of solid lipid, oil, surfactant, and/or cosurfactant. The proper selection and proportion of all these components help in maximum drug loading and stability of the system.
Selection of Solid Lipid and Oil
Both solid lipid and oil are the main components of the NLC system as they provide a core for encapsulation of the drug. Propofol is liquid at room temperature, and hence the selection of solid lipid and oil was done by partitioning study ( ). The solid lipid or oil (200 mg) was mixed with water (1 ml) and heated 5–10°C above the melting point of solid lipid. To the above mixture, a fixed amount of propofol was added and mixed with vortex mixing. The formed mixture was then kept on an orbital shaker (IKA KS 3000i, Germany) at 100 rpm for 12 h. The temperature was maintained at 80°C for solid lipid to keep it in a molten state, whereas for the oil it was maintained at room temperature. After 12 h, the mixture was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm (9168× g ) for 10 min (RESEARCH COMPUFUGE, Remi PR-24 Centrifuge, India) and the supernatant oily phase was separated and analyzed for percent partitioning of propofol using the developed HPLC method described in the Supplementary Information . The solid lipid and oil with maximum percent partitioning value were selected for further study.
Selection of Surfactants
Surfactant selection was carried out by its ability to emulsify the selected solid lipid (glyceryl monostearate) and oil (Labrafac™ Lipophile WL1349) components obtained as a result of partitioning study and also its ability to stabilize the system for a long time. Surfactants like Tween 80, Kolliphor HS 15, Span 20, and Lutrol F68 which are generally recognized as safe (GRAS) by USFDA and mostly used in parenteral formulations were screened for this study. The lipid load (300 mg), solid lipid:oil ratio (1:1), and propofol (1% w / v ) were fixed for this study and emulsified using the selected surfactant (2% w / v ) as per the given method. The surfactant or surfactants which showed good emulsification with lesser particle size, PDI, and maximum stability were optimized further.
Method of Preparation for Propofol NLC
An organic solvent-free method, i.e. , hot emulsification-probe sonication, was employed for the formulation of NLCs ( ). In this approach, the propofol is initially added into a test tube containing the molten mixture of solid lipid, oil, and hydrophobic surfactant (heated 5–10°C above the temperature of the solid lipid) and mixed well with a vortex mixer (Remi lab instruments, Mumbai) to form a lipid melt. Then, into this lipid melt, the aqueous emulsifier solution containing glycerol (heated at the same temperature as that of lipid melt) was added with vortex mixing to form a coarse emulsion. To reduce the globule size of the coarse emulsion, it was subjected to sonication using a Probe Sonicator (Dakshin, Mumbai) operated at 40 W for 120 s with an off-time of 3 s in between. The formed NLCs were then allowed to cool at room temperature. The pH of the prepared NLCs was adjusted in between 7.5 and 8 with 0.1 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution. During the whole process, continuous nitrogen purging over the NLC surface was done. The formed NLC was then sterilized by autoclaving at 121°C, under 15-psi pressure for 15 min in sealed vials. The blank NLCs without propofol were also prepared by following the above procedure.
Formulation Optimization
Preliminary experiments were carried out for preparation of propofol NLCs using different formulation and process variables like solid lipid:oil ratio, lipid concentration, drug concentration, surfactant concentration, cosurfactant concentration, and sonication time. Amongst these variables, lipid concentration, surfactant concentration, and cosurfactant concentration were found as the critical factors that affected the particle size, stability, and free drug present in the NLC formulation. Thus, a central composite design (CCD) was used to systemically investigate the influence of these three critical formulation variables on particle size, stability (zeta potential), and free propofol concentration of the prepared NLC. For each factor, the experimental range was selected based on the results of preliminary experiments and the feasibility of preparing the NLC at the extreme values. The details of the design are listed in Table I . Table I A Central Composite Design Consisting of Experiments for the Three Different Variables Along with Responses Formulation Factor 1 Factor 2 Factor 3 Response 1 Response 2 Response 3 Run A: lipid concentration (mg) B: surfactant concentration (%) C: cosurfactant concentration (%) Y 1 : particle size (nm) Y 2 : zeta potential (mV) Y 3 : free propofol (μg/ml) 1 300.00 0.16 1.00 175.9 − 13.2 13.7 2 300.00 1.00 1.00 172.3 − 32.1 11.4 3 131.82 1.00 1.00 75 − 12 35.7 4 300.00 1.84 1.00 103 − 22.3 14.9 5 200.00 0.50 1.50 122.3 − 25.2 28.4 6 300.00 1.00 0.16 210 − 24.4 12.8 7 200.00 0.50 0.50 123.3 − 15.2 22.1 8 300.00 1.00 1.00 160.8 − 29.1 10.8 9 468.18 1.00 1.00 256 − 37 10.1 10 300.00 1.00 1.00 146.9 − 34.2 11.9 11 300.00 1.00 1.00 154.4 − 32.3 10.3 12 300.00 1.00 1.00 133.8 − 23.1 14.7 13 400.00 1.50 0.50 265 − 30.6 12.5 14 200.00 1.50 0.50 95.7 − 17.1 21.4 15 400.00 0.50 0.50 288.6 − 27.3 10.9 16 300.00 1.00 1.00 163.7 − 21.4 11.7 17 400.00 1.50 1.50 192 − 31.2 15.5 18 200.00 1.50 1.50 80.72 − 16.1 30.5 19 300.00 1.00 1.84 115.3 − 17.2 14.4 20 400.00 0.50 1.50 230.7 − 33.1 12.1 Lipid: Glyceryl monostearate and Labrafac lipophile WL 1349 (1:1) Surfactant: Span 20 Cosurfactant: Lutrol F68
The CCD method provides a potential advantage in experimental design by adding 6 replicated center points and 6 axial points. CCD suggested a total of 20 experiments to be carried out. To analyze the statistical data, the Design-Expert Program 10.0.1 software was used and the analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to determine the significance of the factors and their interactions.
Characterization of Developed NLCs
Particle Size and Zeta Potential
The particle size, PDI, and zeta potential of propofol NLCs and marketed formulation were determined in triplicate using dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Zetasizer ZEN 3600, Malvern, UK) at a scattering angle of 90° at 25°C. Before measurements, the propofol formulations were diluted (1:100) with saline. Particle size data obtained were evaluated using the intensity profile.
Morphology
The surface morphology of optimized formulation of propofol NLCs was determined by a transmission electron microscope (TEM) (Tecnai-20, Philips, Holland). NLCs were dispersed in milli-Q water and a drop of dispersion was placed on the carbon-coated copper grid followed by addition of a drop of 2% ( w / v ) uranyl acetate. Excess liquid was drained and the grid was air-dried. Further, the grid was mounted in the instrument and images were captured.
pH
The pH of the optimized propofol NLCs and marketed formulation was measured using a pH meter (SAB 5000, Lab India Analytical Instruments Pvt. Ltd., India).
Osmolarity
The osmolarity of the optimized propofol NLCs and marketed formulation was measured using a Vapor Pressure Osmometer (K-7000, Advanced Scientific Instruments; Germany).
Viscosity
The viscosity of the optimized propofol NLCs and marketed formulation was determined using a rotational viscometer (Viscolead one, Fungilab, USA). Viscosity was determined at room temperature in triplicate using spindle L3 at a rotational speed of 100 rpm.
Free Propofol Concentration
Free propofol concentration in the optimized NLCs and marketed formulation were analyzed by using a dialysis method ( ). In this method, a dialysis bag (HIMEDIA, India) with a molecular cutoff weight of 1200–1500 Da was filled with 1 ml of glycerol solution (2.25% w / v ) and placed in 50 ml of each propofol formulation for 24 h at room temperature under magnetic stirring. Then, after removal of the dialysis bag, an aliquot of glycerol solution (50 μl) was diluted to 1 ml with methanol and propofol content was determined using the developed HPLC method described in the Supplementary Information . The free propofol concentration, expressed as mean ± SD, was subjected to statistical analysis. The statistical significance of differences in the free propofol concentration data was analyzed using Student’s unpaired t test (Graph pad prism 6). Differences were considered statistically significant at P < 0.05.
Hemolysis Study
The hemolytic potential of the optimized propofol NLCs was evaluated according to an in vitro method reported previously ( ). A written consent form was signed for the collection of blood from a human volunteer. Fresh blood was collected in a heparin-coated tube and immediately centrifuged at 2500 rpm (573× g ) for 15 min to isolate the erythrocytes from the heparinized human blood. The supernatant was discarded and the settled erythrocytes were re-suspended in phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.4). The mixture was centrifuged again, and the sediment (erythrocytes) was rinsed again until the upper fraction of the liquid became clear. The purified erythrocytes were then re-suspended in normal saline to obtain a 2% ( v / v ) of the erythrocyte’s suspension ( , ). After that, 1.8 ml of the erythrocyte suspension was incubated with 0.2 ml of test samples at 37°C for 30 min in an incubator shaker and then centrifuged at 2500 rpm (573× g ) for 5 min. Control samples of 0% lysis (in phosphate-buffered saline) and 100% lysis in sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) in double-distilled water were employed in all experiments. The percent hemolysis was measured by UV–Visible spectroscopic analysis of the supernatant by measuring the hemoglobin released from the ruptured erythrocytes at the wavelength of 545 nm ( ). The mean value of three measurements using different samples was recorded. The percent hemolysis was calculated using Eq. 1 . $$ \%\mathrm{Hemolysis}=\frac{\left(\mathrm{ABS}-\mathrm{ABS}0\right)}{\left(\mathrm{ABS}100-\mathrm{ABS}0\right)}\times 100 $$ (1) where ABS 100 and ABS 0 are the absorbances of the solution at 100% and 0% hemolysis, respectively.
Animal Handling and Care
For pertaining the studies like pain on injection, anesthetic potential, and pharmacokinetics of propofol formulations under study, rats were used as an experimental animal. The studies were performed after the approval of the animal protocol by the Animal Ethical Committee of the Institute of Chemical Technology (Protocol No. ICT/IAEC/2017/P09). Sprague–Dawley female rats, weighing 200–250 g each, were obtained from Bombay Veterinary College, Parel, Mumbai. At the beginning of the experiment, rats were provided with standard food and water ad libitum . They were maintained under an artificial 12 h light–dark cycle and at a constant temperature of 23 ± 2°C and 65% relative humidity. Food and water were freely available, and the animals were acclimatized for more than 7 days before the experiment. All animals were carefully handled throughout the experimental procedure in accordance with the committee for the purpose of the control and supervision on experiments on animals (CPCSEA) guidelines.
Pain on Injection (Rat Paw-Lick Test)
To evaluate the pain experienced by rats after injecting propofol formulations under investigation, rat paw-lick test was performed ( ). Rats were divided into four groups containing six animals each as follows: Group 1: Received 0.9% w / v saline solution Group 2: Received marketed formulation Group 3: Received blank NLCs Group 4: Received propofol NLCs
Rats in each group were injected with a single injection of each formulation (100 μl with a dose of 10 mg/kg of body weight) into the footpad of the right hind paw. The onset and duration of paw licking were carefully recorded for each group of animals. Total licking time was recorded by monitoring each rat for 10 min as the reaction to the “pain on injection” is usually instantaneous and does not last for a very long time. The duration of paw-licks, expressed as mean ± SD, was subjected to statistical analysis. The statistical significance of differences in the duration of paw-lick data was analyzed using Student’s unpaired t test (Graph pad prism 6). Differences were considered statistically significant at P < 0.05.
Anesthetic Action
The anesthetic potential of propofol NLC was evaluated in comparison to the marketed formulation ( ). Twelve animals were randomly divided into two groups containing 6 animals each. For dose administration, rats were restrained in an appropriate plexiglass cage. One group of rats was injected intravenously with the propofol NLC as a bolus dose in the lateral tail vein while the other group similarly received the marketed formulation. Both the formulations were administered at a single dose of 10 mg/kg and the end of injection was taken as time zero ( t = 0). After administration, the time of loss of righting reflex was recorded, which is defined as the time at which the animal lost the capability to regain its normal upright position once manually placed on its side.
Further, the duration of loss of righting reflex (LORR) was recorded as mean ± SD and subjected to statistical analysis. Following recovery from anesthesia, animals were placed in their respective cages and offered food and water ad libitum . The statistical significance of differences in the duration of LORR among the two groups was analyzed using Student’s unpaired t test (Graph pad prism 6).
Pharmacokinetic Study
The pharmacokinetic study of propofol NLCs was evaluated in comparison to the marketed formulation. Animals were separated into 2 groups (6 animals in each group) as shown below: Group 1: received propofol NLCs Group 2: received marketed formulation
Animals were injected intravenously with the propofol formulations as a bolus dose in the lateral tail vein with the dose of the drug at 10 mg/kg. After that, blood samples were withdrawn by a retro-orbital puncture at 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 10, 15, 20, and 30 min and collected in the microcentrifuge tube containing EDTA as an anticoagulant. The plasma was separated from blood samples and analyzed for propofol content using RP-HPLC method described in the Supplementary Information . The extraction efficiency of the plasma extraction method was found to be in the range of 89–96%. Pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated using PKSolver: an add-in program for pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data analysis in Microsoft Excel ( ). A standard non-compartmental analysis–assisted IV bolus method was selected for the plasma pharmacokinetic parameters.
Antimicrobial Effectiveness Test
The ability of propofol NLCs to resist microbial growth was tested at MicroBio Laboratory (Thane, Maharashtra, India) and compared to that of the marketed formulation. Suspensions of four standard USP preservative efficacy test organisms, i.e. , Staphylococcus aureus , Escherichia coli , Candida albicans , and Pseudomonas aeruginosa , were added separately into the four-sterile containers having 20 ml of propofol NLCs and marketed formulation respectively. The test organisms were inoculated with approximately 1 × 10 8 colony-forming units (CFUs) per milliliter. At intervals of 24 h and 48 h, 1 ml of the above sample was plated in triplicate on Soybean Casein Digest Agar with inactivator for fungi and Sabouraud Dextrose Agar with inactivator for bacteria. The bacteria were incubated at 30–35°C for 72 h, whereas fungi were incubated at 20–25°C for 5 days. After the incubation period, the viable counts were calculated in order to determine the antimicrobial effectiveness of the tested formulations.
Storage Stability
Propofol NLCs were evaluated for its physicochemical stability under long-term (25± 2°C/60 ± 5% RH), intermediate (30 ± 2°C/65 ± 5% RH), and accelerated (40± 2°C/75 ± 5% RH) storage conditions. Propofol NLCs were packed into 10 ml of type 1 borosilicate glass vials with rubber stoppers and aluminum crimped tops under a nitrogen atmosphere, respectively, and the vials were stored upright for long-term storage. At various time points, propofol NLCs were evaluated for its appearance, assay, free propofol content, particle size, and pH.
For the assay determination, the NLC formulation equivalent to 20 mg of propofol was accurately weighed and transferred to a 10-ml volumetric flask. Five milliliters of methanol was added followed by sonication for 15 min for drug extraction. The volume was made up to 10 ml with the mobile phase. The resulting solution was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm (9168 × g) for 10 min (RESEARCH COMPUFUGE, Remi PR-24 Centrifuge, India). From the supernatant, 0.1 ml was removed and diluted up to 10 ml with the mobile phase to give a final concentration of 20 μg/ml and subjected to HPLC analysis as described in the Supplementary Information .
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Selection of Solid Lipid and Oils
Different solid lipids like glyceryl monostearate (GMS), glyceryl distearate (GDS), glyceryl tristearate (GTS), glyceryl tripalmitate (GTP), glyceryl dibehenate (Compritol 888 ATO), and cetyl palmitate were screened for the partitioning study. Glyceryl monostearate (GMS) showed 79.36 ± 2.31% partitioning for propofol which was higher than that of any other screened solid lipid (Fig. 1a ). High % partitioning of propofol in GMS could be attributed to its inherent self-emulsifying property ( ), while in the case of oils, various long-chain fatty acids (LCF) and medium- and long-chain triglycerides were screened out of which Labrafac Lipophile WL-1349 (LL WL-1349) showed maximum partitioning for propofol, i.e. , 77.32 ± 1.79% (Fig. 1b ). The higher % partitioning of propofol in LL WL-1349 may be because of its chemical composition. LL WL-1349 is a medium-chain triglyceride (caprylic/capric triglyceride) and previous studies have shown that the polar nature of medium-chain triglycerides towards lipophilic drugs helps in solubilization of more drug into it ( , ). Fig. 1 Percent (%) partitioning of propofol in screened a solid lipids, b oils, and c screening of surfactants based on their effect on particle size and PDI of formulated propofol NLCs
Selection of Surfactants
The NLCs formulated using selected surfactants were screened on the basis of particle size, PDI, and stability after 7 days of storage at room temperature (Fig. 1c ). Amongst the surfactants screened, Tween 80 showed higher particle size of 416.4 ± 13.4 nm and PDI of 0.535 ± 0.041, indicating a broad and heterogeneous particle size distribution, whereas NLCs obtained from Kolliphor HS15 were not found to be stable on storage. On the other hand, NLCs formulated with Span 20 and Lutrol F68 showed reduced particle size and PDI value along with better stability. Span 20 has a tetrahydrofuran ring with a lauric acid chain which might provide better surface coverage and reduced particle size for NLCs ( ). The reduced particle size and PDI in the case of Lutrol F68 might be because of its higher HLB value, i.e. , 24 and its steric stabilization ability, as it is a nonionic triblock copolymer composed of a hydrophobic chain of polyoxypropylene which accommodates at the interface and two hydrophilic chains of polyoxyethylene which orients towards external phase of NLCs ( ). On the basis of these results, Span 20 and Lutrol F68 were selected as surfactant and cosurfactant respectively for further optimization of NLCs.
Formulation Optimization
The central composite design (CCD) was carried out in order to evaluate the effect of the selected critical variables on responses like particle size, stability (zeta potential), and free propofol content. Total 20 experimental runs were generated by CCD as a result of different variables and their subsequent responses are given in Table I . The three dependent values, i.e. , particle size, zeta potential, and free propofol content ranged from 75 to 288.6 nm, − 12 to − 37 mV, and 10.1 to 35.7 μg/ml, respectively. Model selection for response analysis was performed based on the sequential model sum of squares, lack of fit test, and model summary statistics while ANOVA was applied to determine the significance of the variable effects and their interactions and are discussed in detail in the Supplementary Information . Lipid concentration, surfactant concentration, and cosurfactant concentration were considered significant for particle size. For zeta potential, only lipid concentration was found significant, whereas for free propofol concentration, lipid concentration and cosurfactant concentration were found significant. The mathematical equation for responses Y 1 , Y 2 , and Y 3 are as follows: $$ {Y}_1\ \left(\mathrm{particle}\ \mathrm{size}\right)=56.78+0.63\times \mathrm{A}-37.19\times \mathrm{B}-44.84\times \mathrm{C} $$ (2) $$ {Y}_2\ \left(\mathrm{zeta}\ \mathrm{potential}\right)=-2.91-0.06\times \mathrm{A}-1.39\times \mathrm{B}-0.48\times \mathrm{C} $$ (3) $$ {\mathrm{Y}}_3\left(\mathrm{Free}\ \mathrm{propofol}\right)=72.91-0.31\times \ast \mathrm{A}-14.09\times \ast \mathrm{B}+1.01\times \ast \mathrm{C}+9.0\ \mathrm{E}-3\times \ast \mathrm{A}\mathrm{B}-0.028\times \ast \mathrm{A}\mathrm{C}+2.3\mathrm{BC}+4.33\mathrm{E}-4\times \ast {\mathrm{A}}^2+5.16\times \ast {\mathrm{B}}^2+4.17\times \ast {\mathrm{C}}^2 $$ (4)
A positive sign indicates the synergistic effect of a factor on the response, while a negative sign indicates an inverse relationship between factor and response. In the case of Y 1 (particle size), positive coefficients of A in the model refer to an increasing trend of particle size when the concentration of lipid increases. Similarly, the two negative coefficients of B and C indicate a decrease in particle size with the increasing trend of respective factors. As for Y 2 (zeta potential), the negative coefficients of A, B, and C in the model refer to that of a formed NLC having more stability as the concentration of GMS, Span 20, and Lutrol F68 increase. In the case of Y 3 (free propofol), positive coefficient of C indicates that as the Lutrol F68 concentration increases, free propofol concentration in NLCs also increases. This may be because of the partitioning of the drug into the aqueous phase due to the higher HLB value of Lutrol F68, whereas the negative coefficient of A and B indicated that the free propofol concentration decreases as the concentration of lipid and Span 20 increases.
The combined effect of factor A, B, and C can be further interpreted with the help of 3D response surface plots showing the effect of factors on responses (Fig. 2 ). As observed in Fig. 2a–c , the particle size increases with increasing concentration of lipid (A) and decreases with increasing concentration of surfactant (B) and cosurfactant (C), whereas Fig. 2d–f showed that only the lipid concentration had shown a positive effect on zeta potential, as the lipid concentration increases the value of zeta also increased while factors B and C have not shown any effect on the zeta potential of the developed NLCs. However, as for free propofol concentration, Fig. 2g–i shows that factors A and B have a steep curvature, indicating that the lipid concentration and surfactant concentration are the most significant factors of free propofol concentration in developed NLCs. Factor C, i.e. , Lutrol F68 concentration has shown a slight increase in the concentration of the free propofol in the system. Fig. 2 Three-dimensional (3D) response surface plots showing effects of lipid concentration, surfactant concentration, and cosurfactant concentration on responses. a–c Particle size, d–f zeta potential, and g–i free propofol concentration
The desirability function was probed using Design-Expert software to get the optimized formulation. The optimum formulation was built on the defined criteria of minimum particle size, maximum zeta potential, and minimum free propofol concentration. The obtained experimental batch was prepared and compared with the predicted responses to confirm the validity of the optimization procedure. As shown in Table II , it was observed that the experimental values were in the range of the predicted values with a low percentage bias (less than 6%) ( ). Thus, the central composite design for optimization of propofol NLCs was validated. Table II Comparison of Experimental and Predicted Values Under Optimal Conditions for Final Formulation Lipid concentration Surfactant concentration Cosurfactant concentration Size (nm) Zeta (mV) Free drug (μg/ml) 300 mg 1% w / v 0.75% w / v – – – Predicted 174.46 − 24.3 11.18 Experimental 170.1 − 24.1 11.5 % Bias (acceptance criteria = 6%) 2.63 0.82 3.6 Bias was calculated as (predicted value-observed value)/predicted value × 100
Characterization
Particle Size and Zeta Potential
As shown in Table II and Fig. 3 , the optimized formulation of propofol NLCs showed particle size less than 1 μm having a polydispersity index of 0.195, which signifies its acceptability for parenteral administration ( ), whereas zeta value of − 24.1 (Fig. 3b ) indicated sufficient stability of optimized formulation ( ). Fig. 3 Particle size ( a ), zeta potential ( b ), and TEM image ( c and d ) of optimized propofol NLC
Morphology
In transmission electron microscopy study, propofol NLCs showed a spherical appearance having a particle size of less than 200 nm (Fig. 3c and d ). This particle size observed was in good agreement with the size obtained from DLS.
pH
Physiological pH for the intravenous injection should be between pH 5 and 8 ( ). Extremely un-physiological pH is one of the critical factor likely to cause pain on intravenous injection ( ). The pH of lipid emulsions decreases during heat sterilization and storage as a result of an increase in free fatty acid (FFA) content formed due to the hydrolysis of lipids and the emulsified triglycerides ( ). A decrease in pH can also lead to a decrease in the electrostatic repulsion between emulsified oil globules and ultimately lead to increased globule size and emulsion instability ( ). Hence, the pH of the NLCs was adjusted between the range of 7.5–8 with 0.1 M sodium hydroxide solution before sterilization. The pH of propofol NLCs after sterilization was found to be 7.23 ± 0.18, which was a little lower than that of the marketed formulation (7.4 ± 0.06); however, it was still within the desired range and thus indicated the acceptability of formulation for intravenous use.
Osmolarity
Similar to the pH, an extremely un-physiological osmolarity of the formulation is also responsible for pain on intravenous injection ( ), and hence, for this reason, it is essential to determine the osmotic pressure of the parenteral formulation to identify any need for its adjustment. The osmotic pressures of propofol NLCs and marketed formulation were 295.3 ± 1.2 mOsmol/L and 292.1 ± 1.8 mOsmol/L, respectively. Both these formulations, therefore, were slightly hypotonic to 0.9% ( w / v ) saline solution having osmolarity 308 mOsmol/L, thus, showing acceptability for intravenous use.
Viscosity
The viscosity of the lipid-based system depends on various factors like the surfactants and oil used, the ratio of the dispersed and continuous phase, and particle size distribution ( ). Flocculation of emulsions will generally increase the viscosity during storage and, hence, it is crucial for assessing the stability and shelf-life of the emulsion system ( ). The viscosity of propofol NLCs (9.53 ± 0.15 cP) was found to be less than the marketed formulation (11.67 ± 0.20 cP). This relatively low viscosity values indicated that the formulated NLCs were composed of individual spherical particles or bi-continuous structures and no anisometric aggregates were present in the formulation ( ).
Free Propofol Concentration
As shown in Fig. 4a , dialysis method showed significantly less ( p ˂ 0.01) free propofol concentration in optimized NLC (11.26 ± 0.6 μg/ml) as compared to the marketed formulation (18.67 ± 0.66 μg/ml). The concentration of free propofol in NLC formulation was significantly lower (by 40%) than that in the marketed formulation. This may be due to the use of a combination of solid lipid and MCT, which acts as an oil core for propofol in NLCs. The marketed formulation is propofol–LCF nanoemulsion, whereas propofol NLC is a solid lipid–MCT-based nanoemulsion. This combination creates imperfections into the perfect crystalline nature of GMS which helps in the encapsulation of more propofol into it ( ). Further, reports have shown that the use of MCT in nanoemulsion formulations could significantly reduce free drug concentrations in the aqueous phase ( , ). The MCT component used in NLC formulation is Labrafac Lipophile WL-1349, which is chemically a caprylic/capric triglyceride. The presence of both hydrophobic (caprylate group) as well hydrophilic (free –OH group) moieties makes it a partial emulsifier that helps in solubilizing more propofol into it ( ). Span 20, which is the surfactant used for the development of NLC, might also have an effect on reducing the free propofol content because of its hydrophobic nature and lower HLB value which reduces partitioning of propofol into the aqueous phase. Fig. 4 a Free propofol concentration of propofol NLCs in comparison to the marketed formulation using dialysis method ( n = 3; ** P < 0.01). b In vitro hemolysis study of propofol NLCs at various concentration of propofol. c Duration of rat paw-lick for propofol NLC and marketed formulation ( n = 6; *** P < 0.001) and d in vivo anesthetic activity of propofol NLC and marketed formulation ( n = 6). Values plotted are mean ± standard deviation and the statistical significance of differences was analyzed using student’s unpaired t test wherever applicable
Hemolysis Study
Hemolysis study is an in vitro procedure carried out for the formulation to be tested and it helps in toxicity determination and prediction of the acceptability of the same for parenteral use. The optimized propofol NLCs and marketed formulation were tested with human blood erythrocytes in different concentrations (50–200 ppm) of propofol and all were found to be non-hemolytic (Fig. 4a ). This data was compared with the positive control (SLS solution), where complete hemolysis was seen, and negative control (phosphate-buffered saline), where hemolysis was not observed. After calculating the % hemolysis from the above data, it was observed that, at all the tested concentration of optimized propofol NLCs, the % hemolysis was below 5%, whereas for the marketed formulation, % hemolysis was found to be below 10%. In general, % hemolysis values below 10% are considered to be non-hemolytic whereas values above 25% are considered to be hemolytic ( ). Thus, these results indicate the negligible interaction between all formulation components and erythrocytes and suitability of it for parenteral use.
Pain on Injection (Rat Paw-Lick Test)
Many factors are responsible for pain on injection related to propofol including the site of injection, size of the vein, the speed of injection, propofol concentration in an aqueous phase, and buffering effect of the blood ( ). Although all these factors can be tackled out, the main reason associated with this pain is free propofol present in the formulation. Klement et al . have also shown that the intensity of the pain increased with an increase in the free concentration of propofol in the formulation ( ). Pain on injection of propofol can be immediate or delayed. The immediate pain can be a result of an irritant effect whereas delayed pain probably results from an indirect effect via the kinin cascade which has pain latency for 10–20 s ( , ).
As shown in Fig. 4c , the rat paw-lick test showed that the optimized propofol NLCs has significantly less ( P < 0.001) pain on injection (7.33 ± 2.05 s) as compared to the marketed soybean oil–based nanoemulsion (19.5 ± 3.3 s). The pain on injection study was also carried out for blank NLCs in order to confirm whether any part of the formulation can produce pain, and the study showed that the blank NLC has a similar effect as that of normal saline solution, meaning it does not produce any pain on injection. The less pain on injection effect with propofol NLCs might be because of less free propofol present in the formulation. The solid lipid (GMS) and medium-chain triglycerides (Labrafac™ Lipophile WL1349) are able to fully encapsulate the propofol and the surfactant; Span 20 reduced its aqueous partition because of its lipophilic nature and lower HLB value.
Anesthetic Action
The developed formulation propofol NLC is a particulate type of system and hence it is important to know its onset and duration of anesthesia. The optimized propofol NLCs and the marketed formulation were evaluated for their anesthetic potential. The mean time values for the duration of loss of righting reflex of both the formulations are shown in Fig. 4d .
The data obtained from this study showed that the propofol NLCs had a slightly higher duration of anesthesia (15.16 ± 1.06 min) as compared to the marketed formulation (13.83 ± 1.21 min). The time intervals for rats to lose and regain righting reflex activity for both these formulations were not significantly different ( P > 0.05). Moreover, the onset of anesthesia for propofol NLC was similar to that of the compared marketed formulation. The possible explanation for both these findings is the particulate nature of NLCs, since NLCs have the ability to sustain the release of an active agent that is incorporated into it, resulting in maintaining a slightly longer duration of anesthesia ( ), whereas the similar onset of action might be because of the presence of a small amount of free propofol which helps to produce instant anesthesia.
The results from this pharmacological study suggested that the propofol NLC shows a similar pharmacodynamic potential as that of the marketed formulation. These similar pharmacological actions ensured the partitioning of the propofol to the central nervous system in animals.
Pharmacokinetic Study
The mean plasma concentration-time profiles for propofol NLCs and marketed formulation are shown in Fig. 5a . The initial plasma concentration of propofol for the NLC formulation was slightly lower, but overall, the plasma concentration profile for propofol was not significantly different from that of the marketed formulation. Fig. 5 a The concentration of propofol in rat plasma followed by injection of 10 mg/kg propofol as propofol NLC and marketed formulation ( n = 6) and b comparison of antimicrobial activity of propofol NLC and marketed formulation. Values plotted are mean ± standard deviation ( n = 3)
As shown in Table III , the t 1/2 of propofol NLC (19.89 ± 4.20 min) was found to be slightly higher than the marketed formulation (17.15 ± 2.69 min) but the difference was not found to be significant. Similarly, the mean residence time (MRT) was found to be slightly higher for NLC formulation (26.76 ± 2.71 min) than for marketed formulation (24.63 ± 1.19 min) without any significant difference. The higher t 1/2 and MRT for propofol NLCs might be because of its controlled release property, as the drug is present in the solid lipid–oil core in an encapsulated form and it takes time to get released from the system, whereas marketed formulation is a nanoemulsion; hence, drug has to only come out from the oil globules. Some other pharmacokinetic parameters, such as the apparent volume of distribution (Vz), clearance (Cl), and total area under the concentration-time curve (AUC0–30 min), also showed no significant differences between the propofol NLCs and marketed formulation ( P > 0.05). Table III Mean Pharmacokinetic Parameters for Propofol in Plasma of Rat Following a Single Intravenous Dose of propofol NLC and Marketed Formulation. (Data Expressed as Mean ± SD, n = 6) Parameter Unit Marketed formulation NLC t 1/2 min 17.15 ± 2.69 19.89 ± 4.20 T max min 1 1 C max μg/ml 7.30 ± 0.78 6.85 ± 0.39 AUC 0-t μg/ml × min 99.16 ± 5.91 94.87 ± 6.32 AUC 0-inf μg/ml × min 143.87 ± 8.50 141.32 ± 6.93 AUMC 0-inf μg/ml × min 2 3539.51 ± 146.39 3776.98 ± 359.92 MRT 0-inf min 24.63 ± 1.19 26.76 ± 2.71 Vz (mg/kg)/(μg/ml) 1.73 ± 0.36 2.04 ± 0.47 Cl (mg/kg)/(μg/ml)/min 0.069 ± 0.004 0.070 ± 0.003
Antimicrobial Effectiveness
Antimicrobial effectiveness study showed that propofol NLCs without any preservative was found to be effective against all the tested strains of microorganisms (Fig. 5b ). It showed a complete reduction in the viable count of all the tested microorganisms, whereas a marketed formulation having 0.005% w / v of disodium edetate showed less reduction in the viable count against all screened microbial strains, as it is a bacteriostatic agent and did not support further microbial growth. The antimicrobial effect of propofol NLCs might be because of its intrinsic preservative effect. The exact mechanism behind this observed intrinsic preservative effect is not yet clearly understood. However, this effect might be because of formulation components of the NLC, as it composed of Span 20, Lutrol F68, and Labrafac Lipophile WL-1349. Literature has shown that Span 20 has lauric acid in its composition, which has an inherent antimicrobial activity and Labrafac Lipophile WL-1349, a medium-chain triglyceride which also has inherent antimicrobial activity against some microorganisms ( , ).
Storage Stability
The optimized formulation of propofol NLC was subjected for stability studies. The results of the stability study are shown in Table IV . The samples were evaluated for physical appearance, assay, free propofol content, particle size, and pH. All tested formulations of propofol did not show any change in physical appearance with respect to color and odor at the end of 3 months in all the selected storage conditions. All the tested formulations were found to be stable with respect to their particle size and assay. The free propofol concentration was found to increase over the period of 3 months. However, this change was not significant and it could be due to the diffusion of propofol molecules from oil globules or polymeric type network of solid lipid and oil, towards the aqueous phase over the period of time due to high concentration gradient ( ), whereas in the case of pH, its value was found to decrease, but was found to be within the desired range. The change in pH could be because of the production of free fatty acids during storage as previously discussed ( ). Table IV Stability Evaluation of Propofol NLCs (Data Expressed as Mean ± SD, n = 3) Period Appearance Assay (%) Free propofol (μg/ml) Particle size (nm) pH Initial Milky white emulsion 99.9 ± 1.6 11.26 ± 0.6 172.2 ± 3.4 7.23 ± 0.18 25°C/60% RH 1 month Milky white emulsion 99.3 ± 1.5 12.01 ± 0.8 168.3 ± 3.9 7.11 ± 0.23 3 months Milky white emulsion 98 ± 1.7 12.9 ± 0.3 175 ± 4.1 7.10 ± 0.19 30 °C/65% RH 1 month Milky white emulsion 99.2 ± 1.6 11.98 ± 0.4 178 ± 6.1 6.95 ± 0.17 3 months Milky white emulsion 97.2 ± 0.9 12.04 ± 0.9 171 ± 4.2 6.83 ± 0.28 40 °C/75% RH 1 month Milky white emulsion 98.1 ± 1.8 13.16 ± 0.7 176 ± 3.9 7.13 ± 0.16 3 months Milky white emulsion 96.9 ± 2.1 13.25 ± 0.1 181 ± 5.5 6.63 ± 0.23
CONCLUSION
In this study, propofol NLC was successfully developed incorporating significantly lower content of oil, which could reduce the risk of hyperlipidemia. The developed NLCs also showed a significantly lower free propofol concentration than the marketed formulation, resulting in less pain at the site of injection and thus overcoming the major drawback of the marketed formulation. This was achieved without compromising the effectiveness of the formulation as it showed similar anesthetic potential and pharmacokinetics as that of the marketed formulation. Antimicrobial effectiveness study showed that propofol NLCs could prevent microbial growth even in the absence of preservative. Storage stability test indicated the stability of formulation at different storage conditions. Hence, propofol NLCs could serve as a novel and commercially feasible approach for parenteral delivery of propofol and as a suitable alternative to marketed soybean oil–based nanoemulsion.