INTRODUCTION
Transdermal drug delivery is an attractive method as there are no significant first pass metabolism effects from the liver, there is no pain during delivery, no chance of disease transmission by needle sharing, patients can self-administer, and a slow release of drugs is easily achieved ( , ). Researchers have used a variety of techniques to actively increase the permeability of the SC to transdermal transport by diffusion. This study is concerned with the application of low-frequency (20 to 100 kHz) ultrasound to the skin.
Ultrasound-enhanced transdermal drug delivery can be classified into two categories ( ): sonophoresis and sonoporation. In a sonophoresis experiment, the ultrasound field and the permeant are applied to the skin simultaneously ( , , , , ). Sonophoresis is thought to not only increase the skin permeability (due to structural alterations in the SC), but also enhance the permeant diffusion by convection ( ). Sonoporation (also referred to as pre-treatment sonophoresis) was described by Zorec et al . ( ) as “the creation of aqueous pathways in the SC as a result of ultrasound application.” In a sonoporation experiment, ultrasound is applied to the skin for a set period of time to increase its permeability. The ultrasound transducer is then removed and a permeant solution is applied to the temporarily permeabilized skin.
A shortcoming of some previous skin sonoporation and sonophoresis studies has been the low number of repetitions within each dataset. Several studies have reported datasets with n ≤ 4 ( , , , , , , , ). Such a small number of repetitions make it difficult to draw robust conclusions from the data, especially considering the high degree of variability inherent in transdermal transport data ( , ). It is often difficult to conduct a large number of repetitions due to the time required to apply ultrasound during each experiment. This time requirement is made worse by the need for duty cycles and fluid replacement to minimise temperature increases in the coupling fluid. During ultrasound application, a portion of the ultrasound energy is absorbed by the coupling fluid and converted to heat. If left unaddressed, this heating can result in coupling fluid temperatures in excess of 40°C. Such temperatures must be avoided as damage to epidermal cells and burns have been shown to occur when the skin temperature exceeds 40°C ( , , , ). Duty cycles and fluid replacement are the two established methods for mitigating these temperature increases ( , , , , , , , , ). When using a duty cycle, the ultrasound transducer is periodically turned off and on throughout the experiment (a 10% duty cycle means that it takes 100 min to apply 10 min of ultrasound). Fluid replacement involves manually emptying the coupling fluid when it gets to an undesirable temperature and replacing it with fresh solution. Incorporating an alternative temperature regulation system that makes duty cycles and fluid replacement redundant would reduce the time taken for each experiment. That saved time could then be put to better use by running more repetitions, which would strengthen any conclusions drawn from the data.
The study by Terahara et al . ( ) reports an investigation into the influence of ultrasound pre-treatment time on the enhancement of mannitol transport. For each of the four pre-treatments times, only three repetitions were conducted. If that study had not had to use a 50% duty cycle and fluid replacement to keep the temperature below 40°C, the time saved could have been used to run a greater number of repetitions. Similarly, in the sonoporation study by Herwadkar ( ), each transport dataset consisted of only around three repetitions. Again, if a 50% duty cycle had not been used then a greater number of repetitions could have been completed in the same amount of time. Likewise, in the sonophoresis study by Mitragotri ( ), only three repetitions were used to determine the transdermal transport of salicylic acid as a function of application time over 5 h. If a coupling fluid cooling system had have been used, instead of a 10% duty cycle and fluid replacement, then the length of each experiment could have been reduced 10-fold and a greater number of repetitions could have been completed within the same timeframe.
This study demonstrates a diffusion cell setup that circulates the coupling fluid through a thermoelectric cooling device that allows for continuous ultrasound application while avoiding large increases in coupling fluid temperature. With this device, time-consuming duty cycles and fluid replacement are no longer required, reducing the time required to run each experiment. This temperature regulation device is demonstrated with in vitro caffeine transport experiments in which porcine skin samples are continuously sonoporated at three different intensities for 10 min. A caffeine solution is then applied to the skin and left to diffuse for 20 h. The transport at the end of diffusion is quantified with high-performance liquid chromatography. Each dataset in the present study contains a full 10 repetitions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Modified Diffusion Cell
Ports incorporated into a modified diffusion cell enabled the coupling fluid to be circulated in and out of the donor chamber during ultrasound application. The diffusion cell is depicted in Fig. 1 . Unlike the commonly used glass Franz diffusion cells, this diffusion cell was cheap and quick to manufacture. The receiver and donor chambers were turned from rods of solid polypropylene (Polystone, Dotmar EPP Pty Ltd., Christchurch, New Zealand) on a CNC lathe (Top-Turn CNC 406, Jashco Machine Manufacture Co. Ltd., Taichung, Taiwan). The ports and sampling arms were then retrofitted by gluing (Loctite 401, Henkel AG, Düsseldorf, Germany) unidirectional carbon fibre tube (Carbon Fibre Tube Pultruded, MAKERshop, Auckland, New Zealand) into holes drilled in the turned components. The clamps which held the receiver and donor chambers together were 3-D printed from acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS P430, Stratasys, Eden Prairie, MN, USA). Dimensions of the donor and receiver chambers are shown in Fig. 2 to aid any researchers who would like to reproduce the cells for their own use. A representative isometric depiction of a clamp is shown in Fig. 3 . During sonoporation, the diffusion cells were held in place by a specially designed holder which was 3-D printed from ABS (Fig. 4 ). This holder allowed each of the 10 identical diffusion cells to be positioned under the transducer prior to sonoporation, then removed to make room for the next diffusion cell. Fig. 1 Depiction of a diffusion cell (top) isometric view, (middle) top view, and (bottom) front view Fig. 2 Dimensions of the polypropylene donor and receiver chambers: a donor chamber plan view, b donor chamber front view, c receiver chamber plan view, and d receiver chamber right view Fig. 3 Depiction of a 3-D printed ABS clamp Fig. 4 Isometric view of the 3-D printed ABS diffusion cell holder a with the cell in place and b without the cell
Chemicals
The permeant solution consisted of caffeine (ReagentPlus) dissolved in pH 7.4 phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The concentration was 0.5% w / v (5 g/L)—the same caffeine concentration used in the study by Sarheed and Abdul Rasool ( ). The solution was made and stored at room temperature. The caffeine was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO). The PBS was purchased from Thermo Fisher (Waltham, MA).
Porcine Skin
Porcine ears were collected from an abattoir (Ashburton Meat Processors Ltd., Ashburton, New Zealand) immediately after slaughter. The ears were not scalded or washed with detergent at the abattoir. The ears were transported to the laboratory on ice in an insulated container, and after transportation to the laboratory, the ears were cleaned with cold tap water to remove any blood or soil. Skin samples of 1 mm thickness were harvested from the pig ears using an electric dermatome (Dermatome 50 mm, Nouvag AG, Goldach, Switzerland). The dermatomed skin was flash frozen with liquid nitrogen following a method described in the study by Han and Das ( ): each piece of dermatomed skin was individually submerged in a container of liquid nitrogen until boiling stopped, which indicated that the temperature of the skin had reached − 196°C. The frozen skin was then wrapped in Parafilm (PARAFILM, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) placed in sealed plastic containers and stored in a − 20°C freezer until use. The total time from slaughter to freezer was approximately 4 h. The skin samples were stored in the freezer no longer than 20 days.
Ultrasound Generation Intensity
A continuous 20-kHz ultrasound field was generated using a VC 505 ultrasonic processor (Sonics and Materials Inc., Newtown, CT, USA) fitted with a 13-mm diameter replaceable tip. The active face of the transducer was positioned 5 mm from the skin surface during all of the sonoporation experiments in this study. The ultrasound application time was always 10 min. The ultrasound intensities were determined with a commonly used calorimetric method ( , , , , , ). This method was described in Robertson and Becker ( ).
Mitigation of Coupling Fluid Heating
The application of continuous ultrasound can result in coupling fluid temperatures capable of causing burns. In the present study, a circulating, thermoelectric system, first described in Robertson and Becker ( ), was used to mitigate this temperature increase. The coupling fluid circulated through three components (Fig. 5 ): the ported donor chamber (shown in Fig. 1 ), a thermoelectric heat exchanger device, and a peristaltic pump (6-V Peristaltic Pump, Amazon, Seattle, WA, USA). This pump, driven by a power supply (MP3090, Powertech, Taiwan), maintained a constant flow rate of 0.14 L/min around the circuit. Between experimental repetitions, the silicon tubing was removed from the donor chamber ports of one diffusion cell and connected to the next diffusion cell. Fig. 5 System schematic. The dashed lines represent the signal inputs and outputs to and from the instruments in the coupling fluid. The solid lines represent the coupling fluid circuit
The thermoelectric device consisted of six 12 V Peltier plates (Peltier 60 W, TecParts NZ Ltd., Tauranga, New Zealand) attached to a block of aluminium (Fig. 6 ). As the coupling fluid passed through a series of holes drilled in the aluminium block, the coupling fluid temperature tended towards the temperature of the block. This temperature could be varied by altering the power supplied to the Peltier plates. The hot sides of the Peltier plates were attached to water-cooled aluminium fins. These fins, made from square tubing, had side lengths of 40 mm, thicknesses of 3 mm, and overall lengths of 300 mm. Note that a thermally conductive paste (Heatsink Compound, Jaycar Electronics Pty Ltd., Auckland, New Zealand) was applied to each side of each Peltier plate to facilitate heat transfer. The holes drilled in the aluminium block (Fig. 7 ) were connected by sections of silicone tubing. Fig. 6 Schematic of the thermoelectric temperature regulation device showing a the assembled components and b an exploded view of the components. The hot side of the Peltier plates are shown in red while the cold sides are shown in blue. Room temperature water was pumped through the hollow fins Fig. 7 Schematic of heat exchanger block. Sections of silicone tubing diverted the coupling fluid from one hole in the aluminium block to the next. Three Peltier plates were attached to each side of this block
The temperature of the coupling fluid was measured with a thermocouple (Wire Type K thermocouple, Jaycar Electronics Pty Ltd., Auckland, New Zealand) which was positioned outside of the transducer beam so as not to interfere with the ultrasound field (Fig. 8 ). Preliminary experiments were conducted with a thermocouple positioned directly over the skin. The difference in the temperature recorded in these two positions during sonoporation at 39.4 W/cm 2 was less than 1.5°C. Fig. 8 Diffusion cell cross section showing the positioning of the thermocouple and transducer
Transdermal Transport Experiments
Each of the 10 diffusion cells was assembled prior to ultrasound application. This assembly involved filling the receiver chamber with PBS then clamping a piece of skin between the filled receiver chamber and the donor chamber. The assembled diffusion cells were then positioned, one at a time, in the ABS holder. The silicone tubing was attached to the cell to complete the coupling fluid circuit. The transducer and thermocouple were then lowered into position in the donor chamber. The donor chamber was filled with coupling fluid (deionised water). The thermoelectric device and pump were then switched on to lower the coupling fluid temperature to 10°C. With the coupling fluid at 10°C, the transducer was switched on and continuous ultrasound was applied for 10 min at either 23.8, 34.2, or 39.4 W/cm 2 . The temperature regulation system was used to keep the coupling fluid temperature as close to 10°C as possible during ultrasound application. A temperature of 10°C was chosen to show that, even with continuous ultrasound application, the temperature regulation system could maintain the coupling fluid below room temperature. Because temperatures below 10°C have been reported to result in patient discomfort after extended exposure ( ), 10°C was considered a lower limit to clinically relevant conditions. Once all of the skin samples had been sonoporated, the caffeine-buffer solution was applied to the SC. The donor chambers were then covered with Parafilm (Bemis, WI, USA) to prevent evaporation of the fluid during the 20 h of diffusion at room temperature. In addition to the three sets of 10 sonoporation experiments, two sets of 10 control experiments were also conducted. These control experiments were run in the same manner described above; however, no ultrasound was applied. The coupling fluid was simply maintained at 10 or 25°C for 10 min. Note that these are positive controls as opposed to true negative controls as some temperature effect may be expected. However, the term “control” is used for the sake of simplicity. Following each 20-h diffusion period, a 2-mL sample was taken from each receiver chamber via the sampling arm.
Chromatography
The samples taken from the receiver chambers were pipetted into 2 mL chromatography vials (THC09150838, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The chromatography vials were then mounted into an HPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The solid phase consisted of a Poroshell 120 column (EC-C18, DKSH NZ Ltd., Palmerston North, New Zealand). This column was maintained at 40°C. The mobile phase consisted of 10% acetonitrile in water. The flow rate was 0.8 mL/min. The injection volume was 1 μL. The retention time was 3.5 min and the reproducibility relative standard deviation was 1%.
Each receiver fluid sample was injected into the liquid phase before passing through the column and into the UV detector. The peak corresponding to caffeine in each chromatogram was identified by its UV spectrum—caffeine is known to exhibit a UV peak at 273 nm ( , , , ). The area under the caffeine peak was representative of the caffeine concentration. The software package Chromeleon (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) was used to operate the HPLC system and to process the chromatic output. A “blank” consisting of Milli-Q water was run in between each caffeine sample to ensure that any caffeine residue from the proceeding sample had passed through the HPLC system. The caffeine peak areas from the chromatograms were converted to caffeine concentrations using a calibration curve. This curve was produced by measuring the peak areas (in triplicate) resulting from six different known concentrations of caffeine in PBS.
Foil Pitting Experiments
Some previous skin sonoporation and sonophoresis studies have reported ultrasound induced changes in coupling fluid temperature close to 20°C ( , ). The influence that such temperature increases have on the inertial cavitation activity at the skin aperture is not well understood. Aluminium foil was used to investigate this influence in the present setup. Ten pieces of aluminium foil were insonated for 5 s at coupling fluid temperatures of 10, 25, and 40°C. The coupling fluid circulation system was used to achieve these temperatures but was then switched off so that no circulation occurred during ultrasound application.
Statistical Analysis
All transdermal transport and foil pitting experiments were replicated 10 times ( n = 10). The transdermal transport and foil pitting datasets are presented as boxplots. The horizontal lines through the centre of each boxplot represent the median values, while the crosses within each box represent the mean values. Any data point that exceeded the upper quartile value by greater than 1.5 times the interquartile range is deemed an outlier (represented by the “+” symbol). Note that 1.5 times the interquartile range is the common outlier convention when using boxplots ( , , , ). These outlier values were still considered when calculating each median and mean. The p values pertaining to the transdermal transport and foil pitting datasets were found using Wilcoxon rank sum tests as, in each case, a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test rejected the null hypothesis that the relevant datasets are normally distributed at the 5% significance level.
RESULTS
Transdermal Transport
Skin sonoporation experiments were conducted at three different ultrasound intensities (23.8, 34.2, 39.4 W/m 2 ). Each skin sample was sonoporated continuously for 10 min (control experiments were also conducted in which no ultrasound was applied during these 10 min). A caffeine-buffer solution was then applied to the SC (donor side) of the skin and left to diffuse at room temperature for 20 h. The concentration of caffeine in the receiver chambers at the end of this period was measured using HPLC.
Following diffusion for 20 h, the mean and median receiver caffeine concentrations for the control at 10°C were 31.6 and 27.6 mg/L, respectively (Fig. 9 ). For the control at 25°C, the mean and median receiver caffeine concentrations were 42.5 and 34.9 mg/L, respectively. Therefore, an increase in coupling fluid temperature from 10 to 25°C resulted in an increase in the mean receiver concentration of 26% (significant at p = 0.4). Fig. 9 Receiver chamber caffeine concentration following 20 h of transport ( n = 10). During the control protocols, the skin samples were exposed to circulating coupling fluid at either 10 or 25°C. During the sonoporation protocols, the skin samples were exposed to ultrasound at 23.8, 34.2, or 39.4 W/cm 2 with the coupling fluid maintained between 10 and 18°C. The crosses within the boxes represent the mean values. The “+” symbols outside of the boxes represent outliers
Sonoporation at 23.8 W/cm 2 resulted in mean and median receiver caffeine concentrations of 45.9 and 15.6 mg/L, respectively (Fig. 9 ). Sonoporation at 34.2 W/cm 2 resulted in mean and median receiver caffeine concentrations of 111.4 and 95.2 mg/L. Sonoporation at 39.4 W/cm 2 resulted in mean and median receiver caffeine concentrations of 116.6 and 108.7 mg/L. When these values are compared to those from the two control cases, it is apparent that no enhancement was achieved at an intensity of 23.8 W/cm 2 while ultrasound at 34.2 and 39.4 W/cm 2 resulted in mean values that were 3.5 ( p < 0.05) and 3.7 ( p < 0.05) times the mean of the 10°C control case.
Foil Pitting
Foil pitting experiments were used to investigate the influence of coupling fluid temperature on the inertial cavitation activity that occurs at the skin aperture. Ten pieces of aluminium foil were exposed to ultrasound for 5 s at coupling fluid temperatures of 10, 25, and 40°C. The mean and median number of pits following ultrasound application at 10°C were 23.4 and 24.5, respectively (Fig. 10 ). At 25°C, the mean and median were both 10.0. At 40°C, the mean and median were both 3.5. Therefore, an increase in coupling fluid temperature from 10 to 25°C resulted in a 57% decrease in the mean number of pits ( p < 0.05), while an increase from 25 to 40°C resulted in a further 65% decrease ( p < 0.05). Fig. 10 The influence of coupling fluid temperature on the pitting of aluminium foil. The crosses within the boxes represent the mean values ( n = 10). The crosses within the boxes represent the mean values. The “+” symbols outside of the boxes represent outliers
Coupling Fluid Temperature
The coupling fluid temperature was recorded during each of the sonoporation experiments. The temperature regulation system was supposed to maintain a constant steady state coupling fluid temperature of 10 ± 1°C during sonoporation at each intensity. However, due to the power limitations of the thermoelectric device, the coupling fluid temperature increased above 11°C during sonoporation at 34.2 and 39.4 W/cm 2 (Fig. 11 ). The maximum coupling fluid temperature recorded during each sonoporation experiment is shown in Fig. 12 as a function of ultrasound intensity. During sonoporation at 34.2 W/cm 2 , the coupling fluid temperature reached a mean maximum of 13.7°C. During sonoporation at 39.4 W/cm 2 , the coupling fluid temperature reached a mean maximum of 15.8°C. Fig. 11 Example temperature profiles measured during sonoporation for each ultrasound intensity Fig. 12 Maximum coupling fluid temperatures reached during 10 min of sonoporation at 23.8, 34.2, and 39.4 W/cm 2 ( n = 9–10)
The coupling fluid temperature increase without coupling fluid circulation was also measured for each of the three sonoporation protocols. At the lowest intensity, the coupling fluid temperature still exceeded the 40°C threshold (above which burns and damage are known to occur) within the 10 min (Fig. 13 ). The maximum temperature was 44°C. During sonoporation at 34.2 W/cm 2 , the 40°C threshold was exceeded after 5 min and 40 s. The maximum coupling fluid temperature was 55°C. During sonoporation at 39.4 W/cm 2 , the 40°C threshold was exceeded after 4 min and 47 s. The maximum temperature was 61°C. From this temperature data, it is apparent that a time-consuming duty cycle would have been required if the circulating temperature regulation system had not been used. Fig. 13 Temperature profiles measured during sonoporation with no coupling fluid circulation
DISCUSSION
During sonoporation at 23.8 W/cm 2 , the thermoelectric system was able to maintain the temperature within the desired range of 10 ± 1°C. However, when the intensity was increased to 34.2 and 39.4 W/cm 2 , the thermoelectric system could not provide the necessary cooling power and the temperature increased to mean maximum values of 13.7 and 15.8°C after 10 min. Without circulation and cooling, the coupling fluid always exceeded the safe 40°C threshold within 10 min, regardless of the intensity (Fig. 13 ). Therefore, although the thermoelectric system was not always able to maintain a constant coupling fluid temperature in the present study, it was still a significant improvement over a system without cooling, and was sufficient to make any use of duty cycles or fluid replacement redundant.
Due to the higher coupling fluid temperatures reached during sonoporation at 34.2 and 39.4 W/cm 2 , control experiments were run at both 10 and 25°C to determine the influence of increased coupling fluid temperature on the receiver chamber caffeine concentration. An increase from 10 to 25°C resulted in only a 1.3-fold increase in the mean receiver concentration (significant at p = 0.4). Therefore, it can be assumed that the far smaller increases of 3 to 6°C that occurred during sonoporation at 34.2 and 39.4 W/cm 2 would have resulted in negligible temperature induced changes in the SC structure—any changes in post-sonoporation receiver chamber caffeine concentration resulting from US must then have been due to inertial cavitation activity, the main mechanism behind sonoporation ( ), influencing the SC permeability.
Sonoporation at 23.8 W/cm 2 had a negligible influence on the receiver chamber caffeine concentration relative to the control cases: the increase relative to the 10°C control case was only significant at p = 0.2. However, when the intensity was increased to 34.2 W/cm 2 , the mean receiver chamber caffeine concentration after 20 h of diffusion increased to 3.5 times that of the 10°C control case ( p < 0.05). A further increase in intensity to 39.4 W/cm 2 resulted in a mean receiver concentration that was 3.7 times that of the 10°C control case ( p < 0.05). These increases in receiver concentration can be attributed to the increase in skin permeability enhancement known to occur with increasing sonoporation intensity ( ). This increase in permeability enhancement with increasing intensity is caused by an associated increase in inertial cavitation activity ( ), the main mechanism behind sonoporation ( ). From the transport increases at 34.2 and 39.4 W/cm 2 , it is concluded that ultrasound enhancement can be achieved while the coupling fluid is circulated through a cooling device. This temperature control technique provides a functional alternative to the use of duty cycles and fluid replacement. The time saved by employing this circulation cooling method (instead of duty cycles and fluid replacement) could be used to run more repetitions in future studies, which will lead to more reliable datasets.
The ultrasound-induced increases in transdermal transport achieved in the present study are comparable to those of the most similar study in the literature—Sarheed and Abdul Rasool ( ). That study also applied continuous ultrasound to porcine skin for 10 min, with a transducer to skin distance of 5 mm, then allowed a caffeine solution to diffuse for 24 h (similar to the 20 h in the present study). However, that study used a lower intensity (3.7 W/cm 2 ), a smaller transducer tip (3 mm diameter), and did not employ a circulating temperature regulation system. With that setup and those protocols, Sarheed and Abdul Rasool ( ) achieved a 1.5-fold mean caffeine transport enhancement relative to a passive permeation case. Therefore, the results of the present study are comparable. The caffeine transport enhancements achieved with intensities of 34.2 and 39.4 W/cm 2 in the present study were, respectively, 2.3 and 2.5 times that achieved by Sarheed and Abdul Rasool ( ). These greater enhancements are reasonable given the aforementioned positive relationship between intensity and post-sonoporation transport.
Previous studies have reported ultrasound induced changes in coupling fluid temperature close to 20°C ( , ). The influence that such temperature increases have on the inertial cavitation activity at the skin aperture is not well understood. In the present study, foil pitting experiments were used to investigate this influence. For a transducer to skin distance of 5 mm, an increase in coupling fluid temperature from 10 to 25°C resulted in a 57% decrease in the mean number of pits ( p < 0.05) after 5 s. An increase from 25 to 40°C resulted in a further 65% decrease in the mean number of pits ( p < 0.05). It is then concluded that, for the skin sonoporation experiments in this study, the skin was exposed to less inertial cavitation activity when the coupling fluid temperature was higher. An explanation for this temperature effect can be found in the study by Bader ( ) which postulated that the cavitation threshold, which decreases with increasing temperature ( ), limits the energy that can be stored within a system. Therefore, as the coupling fluid temperature increased in the present study, the maximum rarefactional pressure decreased which caused a decrease in the inertial cavitation activity at the skin aperture. The significant influence of coupling fluid temperature on inertial cavitation activity shown in Fig. 10 further reinforces the need for a system which mitigates temperature changes during ultrasound application.
CONCLUSIONS
This study demonstrated a circulating, thermoelectric system capable of mitigating temperature increases during skin sonoporation or sonophoresis. This system enabled the use of continuous ultrasound with minimal increases in coupling fluid temperature (< 6°C). The time saved by not having to use duty cycles or fluid replacement enabled 10 repetitions to be conducted for each transport dataset within a reasonable timeframe. Significant enhancements ( p < 0.05) were achieved at intensities of 34.2 and 39.4 W/cm 2 . Therefore, it is concluded that transdermal transport enhancement can be achieved while the coupling fluid is circulated and cooled. This circulation system provides a functional alternative to the use of duty cycles and fluid replacement. The time saved by employing this circulation cooling system (instead of duty cycles and fluid replacement) could be used to run more repetitions in future studies, which will lead to more reliable datasets. Foil pitting experiments showed that mitigating coupling fluid temperature increase not only saves time, but is also important if a consistent level of inertial cavitation activity is to be maintained.