INTRODUCTION
Increasing the solubility of poorly water-soluble drugs is an important issue for many drug molecules, which may directly affect bioavailability, and has attracted many pharmaceutical scientists finding ways to improve the solubility of water-insoluble drugs. Theoretically, drugs are classified by their solubility and permeability according to biopharmaceutical classification system (BCS). Only 5% of drugs are characterized by high permeability and aqueous solubility (BCS I). About 90% of drugs in development are included into BCS II or BCS IV, which exhibits they are poorly soluble and have high or low permeability ( ). The absorption of orally administered drug is inefficient and the drug shows poor bioavailability when it is insoluble in gastric medium. Therefore, the solubility improvement of poorly soluble drugs is of great significance in clinical applications.
Solubility improvement approaches can be divided into physical methods, chemical methods, or some other techniques ( ). Physical methods include reduction of particle size, modification of the crystal properties, solid dispersion, and cryogenic techniques. Chemical methods include salt formation, complexation, derivatization, change of pH, etc. In addition to physical and chemical modifications of drugs, other techniques also can be used to enhance solubility of water-insoluble drugs, such as supercritical fluid process, addition of surfactant, cosolvency, hydrotrophy, solubilizer, and some innovative excipients.
Hot melt extrusion (HME) is an efficient technique for the production of pharmaceutical amorphous solid dispersions (ASDs), which considerably increases the solubility of water-insoluble drugs ( ). HME was previously known as an important technique for the manufacture of plastics and food processing, as well as metals and devices. In 1966, Speiser et al . ( ) began to apply HME to the pharmaceutical field. After that, because of the lack of sufficient attention, related research papers are published intermittently, and the progress of HME in the pharmaceutical field was slow. In the early 1970s, HME was first used in pharmaceutical formulation, which means that HME has become an accepted method for preparing solid pharmaceutical forms ( ). The growing number of published papers and issued patents of HME worldwide indicate that pharmaceutical scientists are increasingly interested in this technique. Existing papers show that HME can improve the solubility and dissolution rate of poorly water-soluble drugs, thereby improving bioavailability. Some commercial products produced by HME have been approved by FDA, indicating the commercial viability of this technology.
Apart from enhancement of solubility and bioavailability, HME can also prepare targeted, sustained, and shaped drug delivery systems ( , , , ). The matrices-loaded drugs can be sorted into chemical drugs, natural extracts, biological agents, and multiple drugs. Appropriate drug delivery systems are needed for better therapeutic effect. Targeted drug delivery systems can provide some advantages, such as avoiding first-pass metabolism and reducing drug dosage, thereby minimizing or preventing side effects caused by high drug doses. And HME also can be applied to develop sustained drug delivery system, which means the drug is released in a period of time with a controlled manner ( ). Shape of the final product plays an important role in the route of administration, in which the certain shape is required. After melting is completed, screws force the molten extrudate forward to a preset die to impart a specific shape to the product for intended applications ( e.g. , transmucosal films). The screws can be classified into three types, such as single-screw, twin-screw, and multi-screw. Screw designs can be shear intensive and/or passive based on the components specified in the design. An extruder may have not only one screw, twin-screw extruder (TSE) has better mixing capability than that of single-screw and is also a well-received device in pharmaceutical processing ( ). The final shaped product can be classic tablet, capsule shape, or predesigned shape to satisfy different applications such as vaginal rings, implants, buccal film, and so forth ( ).
A variety of natural or synthesized materials can be used in HME process, diverse materials bring specific properties to the final product. Types of material not only decide the characteristic of extrudates, but also may change some physical properties of the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API). In addition, the temperature during the HME process needs to be higher than the glass transition temperature (T g ) and melting temperature (T m ) of materials to obtain mixture of APIs, polymers, and aids in molecular level, thus thermal stability is the pivotal consideration factor in the selection of materials ( ). Materials selection is important when designing polymeric formulations for various drug delivery systems. However, thermal instability of drugs and polymers always limits the spectrum of selectable polymers so it is essential to design new suitable polymers.
HME has many advantages over conventional technologies for formulating pharmaceutical products. For instance, it is an environmental-friendly technology that is easy to scale-up, and requires fewer processing steps. HME is applicable to mask taste, improve solubility, and shaped delivery; it can also be conjugated with other techniques, such as nanotechnique, three-dimensional printing, which bring richer innovative applications of HME in drug delivery systems ( , , ). With the application of Process Analytical Techniques, HME is considered as a promising technology to fabricate scalable products. Currently, HME is increasingly interesting for its innovations especially the abuse-deterrent formulation, co-extrusion, and some new applications in gel formulations and co-amorphous drug-amino acid system.
Over the past years, HME has gained great popularities and got some undiluted enthusiasm in preparing amorphous solid dispersions, in which drug is dispersed into functional excipients in the form of amorphous with higher oral bioavailability compared to the crystalline formulation ( ). In this review, we discussed equipment and process of HME together with its applications for drug delivery, and innovations with other techniques such as nanotechnique, 3D printer, and we have specially focused on the selection of materials employed in HME processing.
HOT MELT EXTRUSION PROCESSING
Hot melt extrusion is a technology in which API enters matrix as a whole and melted under the preset temperature, then forced forward the die into products. As a widely used process, HME has advantages over previous pharmaceutical formulation techniques, but challenges remain in the development of polymeric formulations. Here, we summed up advantages, challenges, opportunities, and innovations of HME in the use of pharmaceutical field in Fig. 1 . The equipment of HME consists of drive, feeder, extruder, and downstream system, all process steps are linked on-line, and can be used to produce products with different shape (Fig. 2 ). The quality of the extruded product can be influenced by many factors, such as temperature, stability of materials, feed rate, screw speed, the viscosity of materials, shear rate, and the elasticity ( ). Fig. 1 Advantages, challenges, opportunities, and innovations of hot melt extrusion in pharmaceutical field Fig. 2 The equipment and kinds of dosage forms of HME. a The equipment of HME. Adapted with permission from ( ). b Various dosage forms prepared by HME
The extrusion process can be divided into dry or wet extrusion according to the characteristics of feedstock. In wet extrusion, the process can be done at or near room temperature, which allows the thermal-sensitive drugs to be loaded into matrices for pharmaceutical applications. However, the use of solvents and the ultimate solvent removal method make wet extrusion a complicated, costly, and less environmentally friendly process ( ). The drying temperature can affect the final properties of the extruded pellets according to Schrank’s research ( ). Different with wet extrusion, dry extrusion is a solvent-free technique; thus, many process steps are reduced and results in HME, a single-step operation. The feedstock in dry extrusion is generally in solid form and heated, softened by the elevate temperature in the barrel, the friction and the shear stress during transit, and finally shaped into the desired shape.
APPLICATIONS IN DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS
A large number of researches have demonstrated the feasibility of HME in pharmaceutical field. In recent years, HME has been widely studied for its applications in solubility and bioavailability enhancement, taste masking ( ), and various drug delivery systems (DDSs) ( , , , , ) and HME was also developed to solve many practical difficulties ( ). However, there are currently only a few commercial HME pharmaceutical products marketed according to our investigation. As a kind of vaginal ring, the marketed NuvaRing® was successfully prepared via HME to release drugs for about 3 weeks for the indication of contraceptive ( ). Lacrisert®, a once-a-day ophthalmic implant prepared by HME for dry eye syndrome, exhibits longer release time while compared to artificial tears ( ).
Utilization of polymeric formulation prepared by HME in DDSs is the main focus of this part. Several types of loads can be employed in HME, such as chemical drugs, biological agents, natural extracts, and others like inorganic mineral drugs. Some drugs loaded in polymeric formulations have been listed in Table I according to the type of drugs. Table I Some Different Types of Drugs Loaded in Polymeric Formulations by HME Category Model drugs Indication Matrix Temperature (°C) Dosage form Remarks Ref Chemical drugs Itraconazole Antifungal Soluplus® 150 – ( ) Felodipine Hypertension HPC/HPMC 165 Pellet ( ) Clotrimazole Antifungal PCL 140 Film ( ) Diclofenac sodium Anti-inflammatory Kolliphor® P 407 100 Gel ( ) 5-FU Anticancer PLGA 85 Pellet ( ) Risperidone Schizophrenia PCL 150 Implant ( ) Codeine phosphate Analgesia Corn starch 65–85 Pellet Wet extrusion ( ) Natural extracts Quercetin Anticancer Carnauba wax 80 Powder ( ) Piperine Anti-inflammation Soluplus® 100–130 Pellet ( ) Artemisinin Antimalarial Soluplus® 110 Pellet ( ) Paclitaxel Anticancer PEG/Pluronic F-68 120 Powder ( ) Curcumin Anticancer PCL 65 Implant ( ) Bioactive agents BSA – PLGA ~80 Implant ( ) Lysozyme Bacterial infection PLGA 95 Implant ( ) Glucose oxidase Bacterial infection PLGA 95 Implant ( ) Bacteriophage Qβ Immunology therapy PLGA 95 Implant ( ) Others As 4 S 4 AML Soluplus 120 powder ( ) ZnSO 4 Zinc deficiency Soluplus 100–120 Powder ( ) Naproxen/Meglumine Anti-inflammatory Povidone/copovidone/Soluplus 180 – ( ) Soluplus® caprolactam–polyvinyl acetate–polyethylene glycol graft copolymer, HPC hydroxypropyl cellulose, HPMC hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, PCL poly (caprolactone), Kolliphor® P 407 poloxamer, PLGA poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid), PEG polyethylene glycol, Pluronic poloxamer, BSA bovine serum albumin, ZnSO 4 zinc sulfate monohydrate, AML acute myeloid leukemia
Applications for Loading Chemical Drugs
There are only 5% of drugs that are highly permeable and water soluble, and many others are insoluble in water, which limit their utilization in clinical applications, even if they have the potential to treat common clinical problems, such as cardiovascular disease ( ), cancer ( ), inflammation ( , ), and infection ( ). Most of the marketed products prepared by HME are small-molecular drugs. In this section, different chemical drug loaded formulations prepared by HME will be discussed.
Cancer is considered as a disease that cannot be completely cured. As a commonly used method in cancer therapy, chemotherapeutic drugs usually cause normal cell damage and side effects due to lack of tumor-targeting and the required high-dose administration. Therefore, a sustained-release formulation of drug with local anticancer activity is a benefit for delivery of chemotherapy drug, which can be realized by HME ( ). 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is a chemotherapy agent that serves for the treatment of various cancers, but it is eliminated rapidly and has a short biological half-life, which is a limitation in clinical applications ( ). In a recent study, 5-FU was loaded into PLGA-based injectable pellet via HME; sustained 5-FU release was found in both in vivo and in vitro. Meanwhile, the result revealed that the 5-FU-loaded implant showed enhanced anticancer activity in colon cancer model when compared to a soluble 5-FU formulation with equal dose ( ). However, reports on the use of anticancer drugs in HME formulations are not rich enough nowadays.
HME also manufactured many formulations to solve the solubility-related problems of poorly soluble chemicals ( , ). Thiry et al . ( ) produced solid dispersion formulations with antifungal drug itraconazole (ITZ) and polymer Soluplus® via HME to enhance solubility of ITZ and thereby improve its bioavailability. ITZ can also be used for intestinal targeted delivery system owing to its pH-dependent solubility profiles ( ).
In recent years, HME has gained significant attention in the development of trans-drug delivery systems involving transdermal ( ), transmucosal ( ), and transungual ( ) drug delivery systems. Albarahmieh and colleagues prepared an Eudragit RS PO-based ibuprofen transdermal film with favorable drug release rate and triggered permeability by hydration from the skin itself ( ). Similarly, Palem et al . ( ) developed an oral transmucosal delivery of domperidone (DOM) from bioadhesive HME film, demonstrating that the buccal HME film can be a promising way for enhancing the bioavailability of poorly soluble drugs.
Targeted drug delivery systems can deliver and localize drugs to specific regions to improve efficacy and safety by avoiding the systematic side effects. HME is considered as an effective and economical technique to fabricate modified targeted drug delivery system formulations and improve the properties of the final products ( ). Because of the pH-dependent solubility in aqueous and stronger physical stability under high temperature, Eudragit® FS was often employed as polymer matrix for colon targeted therapy. Zhang et al . ( ) showed that the colonic delivery of diclofenac sodium can be achieved by HME, and its controlled release rate is better than conventional methods. The addition of functional polymers ( e.g. , Eudragit® FS) enables HME to be used in targeted delivery.
In addition to chemical drugs, other types of loads such as natural extracts ( ), bioagents ( ), inorganic mineral drug ( ), and multiple drugs ( ) are also suitable in HME formulations, which will be discussed later.
Applications for Loading Natural Extracts
Undoubtedly, the bioactive natural extracts play an important role in early drug discovery and synthesis. According to report, most drugs are either natural extracts or their analogues ( ). Up to now, hot melt extrusion has emerged as a robust and continued technique that combines APIs and various materials such as polymers and lipid matrix to load natural extracts to mask unpleasant taste ( ).
In the treatment of cancer, natural plant extracts such as paclitaxel ( ), curcumin ( ), and quercetin ( ) exhibit excellent anticancer activities. While challenges remain for these natural extracts, including the poor water solubility and bitter taste, which are unacceptable among geriatric and pediatric patients. These extracts have been reported in conjunction with HME to improve water solubility and mask bitter taste. Khor et al . ( ) used twin-screw melt extruder to microencapsulate quercetin powder with water-insoluble carnauba wax for the better taste-masking efficiency compared to non-encapsulated quercetin. As a poorly soluble thermolabile drug, artemisinin poses significant processing challenges to form solid dispersions ( ). Kulkarni successfully prepared melt extruded solid dispersions with artemisinin, using the amphiphilic copolymer Soluplus®, as it is able to improve solubility of poorly soluble drugs and can be extruded below 120°C without the addition of plasticizer ( ).
In addition to the aforementioned drugs, natural extracts such as piperine ( ) and Ginkgo biloba extract (GBE) ( ) that come from piper and G. biloba , respectively, were also loaded into different matrices by HME, and got satisfactory results in increasing the dissolution rate and bioavailability.
Although the studies aforementioned demonstrated that HME can be an alternative technique for loading natural extracts, the high temperature during extrusion process is still a major problem and limits the loading of thermolabile natural extracts. This means a lot of work needs to be done in the carrier design.
Applications for Loading Biological Agents
Biological agents, such as peptides and proteins, have been widely used because of their desirable therapeutic effects. However, the shortcomings exist simultaneously, such as short half-life period and easy degradation under physiological environment. HME is a typical method for encapsulating small molecule drugs ( ), and it has been reported that biological agents also can be encapsulated with remaining activation and reduction degradation even at the high temperature. PLGA-based implants with the bovine serum albumin (BSA) embedded was managed for the aim of protein sustained release ( ). Similarly, PLGA was also applied to encapsulate lysozyme in the process of HME, activity of enzyme retained and the stability of lysozyme increased with the utilization of solid-state ball milling ( ).
In immunotherapy, bacteriophage Q β , a levivirus phage with a diameter of 28 nm, was successfully encapsulated in a PLGA implant for application of sustained-release vaccine ( ). Figure 3 C shows TEM images of Q β (b) and the recovered Q β (c) after melt encapsulation with PLGA, and suggested their icosahedral shape retained after encapsulation. In this study, structural integrity and biochemical signature of Qβ were maintained for further treatment. In another study, antigen ovalbumin and adjuvant Quil-A were loaded in TSE extruded lipid implants for vaccine delivery ( ). These implants have combined the advantages of sustained release and particular release. Fig. 3 Applications of HME for mechanochemical formulations and nanotechnique. A HSPLM photomicrography images of an equimolar mixture of MEG and NPX at different temperature showed solid-liquid phase transition and interaction between drugs (the scale bars are 100 μm). B Hydrogen bonding synthons (indicated by dashed lines) for the CBZ-NCT cocrystal (a) and CBZ (b). C AFM characterization of the phenytoin/Soluplus nano-extrudate (a) (the scale bar is 2 μm) and illustrated TEM images of Q β (b) and recovered Q β (c) after encapsulation with PLGA (the scale bar is 50 μm in b and c). Adapted with permission from ( , , , )
However, there are still very few articles about bioagents-loaded HME formulations. Further optimization of the extrudates is required for potential applications of HME in different antigens and peptides delivery.
Applications for Loading Inorganic and Multiple Drugs
In addition to the above drugs, inorganic drugs and two or more drugs may also be encapsulated in polymeric formulations by HME. Ma et al . enhanced solubility of inorganic mineral drug As 4 S 4 using hot melt extrusion ( ). The extruded As 4 S 4 had better aqueous solubility, and is more effective in treating acute myeloid leukemia and chronic myelocytic leukemia compared to raw As 4 S 4 . Another study developed extruded nanocomposites loading zinc sulfate monohydrate (ZnSO 4 ) as nano-sized zinc supplementation ( ).
Despite inorganic drugs, there have been several drugs being mixed into multiple-drug-loaded extrudate. Liu et al . combined naproxen (NPX), meglumine (MEG), and polymers such as povidone, copovidone, and Soluplus® at the elevated temperature in extruder to form amorphous solid dispersion ( ). The resulting product was characterized by DSC and hot-stage polarized light microscopy (HSPLM), solid-liquid phase transition was shown in Fig. 3 A. By mixing multiple drugs, the final product can be more physically stable and have better dissolution properties because of the ionic interaction between the drugs.
MATERIALS SELECTION
Suitable materials are significant for developing desirable DDS and manufacturing products. Materials used in HME include carriers, drugs, and aids. In this section, we will mainly show the selection of carriers and aids in HME formulation. The carriers for HME can be categorized into two types: natural and synthetic.
Natural Polymers
As bio-derived polymers, natural polymers and their derivatives are regarded as valuable and significant sources in the biomedical application. However, thermal treatment and mechanical effect often lead to degradation of natural polymers ( ).
Cellulose and their derivatives are a group of polymers commonly used in HME, but chain scission reactions during the heating process often result in a decrease in molecular weight ( ). After chemical structure modification, the chemical and physical properties of cellulose are improved. Commonly used cellulose-basic polymers include hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC) ( ), hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) ( ), ethyl cellulose (EC) ( ), and hypromellose acetate succinate (HPMCAS) ( ). Yang et al . ( ) fabricated EC-based metoprolol tartrate (MT) sustained-release pellets by combining HME and hot melt coating, and solved the initial burst release problem caused by HME. Chitosan is a non-toxic polymer with excellent biocompatibility, biodegradability, and bioadhesion. It can be used as a drug carrier for extruded pellets, implants, or targeted drug delivery systems ( ).
Furthermore, both starch and xanthan gum are utilized as carriers for HME. Starch is the main source of food energy for humans and it is also a low-cost biodegradable thermoplastic widely used in melt extrusion ( ). Xanthan gum is used as hydrophilic carrier in controlled-release formulations ( ). Besides the above materials, gum arabic ( ), carnauba wax ( ), and white beeswax ( ) are also reported as carriers in HME.
Synthetic Polymers
As for the synthetic polymers utilized in HME, which can be either biodegradable or non-biodegradable, the thermal stability and chemical property of the material, and even the interaction between polymers and drugs must be monitored to eliminate any degradation and improve efficacy. In general, the polymer should have suitable mechanical, physical, chemical, and thermal properties to maintain its original properties after processing ( ).
Biodegradable synthetic polymers are those that degrade over time into non-toxic metabolites that then eliminated by physiological elimination ( ). Among these biodegradable polymers, aliphatic polyesters ( e.g. , poly (lactic acid) (PLA) ( ), poly (lactic acid-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) ( ), poly (caprolactone) (PCL) ( ), and copolymers), poly (orthoesters) (POE) ( ), polyurethane (TPU) ( ), and polyanhydrides ( ) are widely used in HME process.
PLA is a commonly used biodegradable and bioresorbable aliphatic polyester polymer for implantation and long-acting injection ( ). Our research group developed PLA-based implantable medical devices via HME for sustained release of dexamethasone to control inflammatory reaction and has no side effects ( , ). Zoladex® is a PLGA-based marketed product prepared by HME, which shows good controlled drug release property for 28 days or 12 weeks ( ). Because of the surface degradation mechanism, POE and polyanhydrides are both utilizable in HME for preparing controlled drug release systems ( ). Because of its slow degradation properties, TPU has been widely explored as tissue engineering scaffold and long-term medical matrix ( ).
There are many polymers with poor biodegradability also received in HME for their multiple functions for kinds of DDSs, such as ethylene-co-vinyl acetate (EVA) ( ), poly (acrylic acid) (PAA), polyethylene oxide (PEO) ( ), and their copolymers ( e.g. , Kollidon VA®, Soluplus®, and Eudragit® ( )) are investigated as excellent candidates for HME.
In addition to polymers can be selected as carriers for HME processing, inorganic materials such as Neusilin® can also be used as a carrier for the solid dispersion of tranilast, indicating the feasibility of using inorganic materials as carriers in HME ( ).
Aids
Processing aids used in HME include plasticizers, surfactants, pH modifiers, antioxidants, and so forth ( ). Plasticizers are typically low-molecular-mass compounds capable of lowering the processing temperature and reducing the APIs and carriers degradation ( ). Chen’s research found that as the plasticizer (PEG) concentration increased, drug release from the PLA matrix increased ( ). Surfactants like poloxamer and polysorbate are applied to increase solubility and dissolution rate of drug products ( ). Many of these surfactants also provide other functionality as plasticizers in HME formulations. Researchers found pH modifiers can reduce the crystallinity of API, inhibit the recrystallization of a solid dispersion system, and also contribute to solubility enhancement ( ). Antioxidants can be used to prevent oxidative degradation. And other aids, such as release-modifier agents, pore formers, colorants, etc. , may also be added depending on the properties of APIs and the final dosage form ( ). The utilization of these functional excipients can affect characteristics of the final products and impart predesigned properties to the extruded products for solving practical problems and enhancing the efficiency of extrusion. In choosing proper aids in HME, consideration needs to be given to the characteristics of various aids, aids-polymer compatibility, and the expected properties of extrudates ( ).
Overall, pre-formulation research for different DDSs is important, rational selection of API, carrier, and aid is the prerequisite for the success of final product. In the choice of API, acceptable thermal stability in the anticipated temperature range and the solubility in organic solvents are both important for assessing the suitability of HME for production. Also, miscibility of API with pharmaceutical carriers must be considered ( ). As for carrier selection, a thorough understanding of the desired DDS and characteristics of commonly used polymers is needed. In general, chemical structure, T g , melt viscosity, thermal stability, biodegradability, and lipophilicity are important factors in polymer selection. For example, water-soluble and low-molecular-mass polymers are suitable to improve drug release rate, thus often utilized in immediate release formulation. As for sustained and controlled DDSs, water-insoluble and higher molecular weight polymers are required to slow drug release. Studies have found that higher molecular weight polymers exhibit a slower drug release ( , ). And incorporating water-soluble polymers, pH-dependent pore formers can modulate drug release profiles ( ). Based on the controlled release drug delivery formulation, suitable functional aids can be added to impart new properties to the product. Gastroretentive DDS can be fabricated based on the expansion of CO 2 , which may be produced by sodium bicarbonate during HME process ( ). And the aids selection, as mentioned before, should be based on the characteristics of drugs and the predesigned dosage form. At the same time, physiochemical properties and interactions between candidate drugs and carriers are important in HME formulation design. With a lower T g polymer introduced in HME formulation, the challenge in preparing solid dispersions within thermal-sensitive drug may be addressed ( ).
CURRENT STATUS
Since HME has many advantages over conventional techniques, the widespread applicability of HME in pharmaceutical field has been constantly discovered in recent years. HME provides many benefits for industrial production as a continuous process. At the same time, the practicability of combining HME with other technologies has also proven useful for further formulation development.
The Process Analytical Technology
The FDA’s process analytical technology (PAT) is a system that was introduced in 2004 to enhance the apprehension of the process by designing, analyzing, and controlling different operations, and measuring the performance and quality results of materials, and manufacturing operations in a timely manner to guarantee the ultimate product quality ( ). The HME products have been evaluated by a variety of analytical methods, including X-ray diffraction (XRD), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), near-infrared and Raman spectroscopy, and UV/Vis spectroscopy ( , ). Both XRD and DSC are not only widely employed to characterize the crystallization characteristics of HME products, but also distinguish solid dispersions, solid solutions, and physical mixture of API and polymer. TGA is an analytical method for estimating the thermostability of materials by studying decomposition and desolvation behavior of mixtures. Near-infrared (NIR) and Raman spectroscopy are useful real-time techniques for measuring product attributes and critical manufacture, as well as providing chemical and physical properties of materials to aid in understanding the process ( ). The PAT strategy controls the process in real-time, helping formulation design and ensuring product quality. At the same time, PAT strategy makes HME a continuous process that can be systematically scaled up.
Mechanochemical Formulations
Mechanochemistry can be seen as a combination of chemistry and mechanical engineering on a molecular scale. Recently, HME has received more attention due to its use in mechanochemical formulations, including cocrystal synthesis ( ) and reactive extrusion ( , ). Cocrystallization is considered as a promising approach for improving drug solubility, bioavailability, and modifying the physicochemical properties of APIs and materials, which form non-covalent forces between two or more compounds without altering the structure of the drug ( ). Medina et al . had demonstrated that HME can be effectively utilized in manufacture of cocrystals ( ). Boksa et al . ( ) reported matrix-assisted cocrystallization, a novel method for HME-based cocrystals production and formulation. In this study, carbamazepine (CBZ) and nicotinamide (NCT) were co-processed into Soluplus®, hydrogen bonding is the primary force in CBZ-NCT cocrystal (Fig. 3 B), and the solubility of CBZ-NCT cocrystal was 152-fold greater than that of CBZ dehydrate.
Mechanochemistry is reported to be employed in HME process to simplify multistep chemical synthesis into a single continuous process through a TSE. Reactive extrusion means a process that chemical reactions carried out during the extrusion. TSE is commonly used for reaction telescoping because it facilitates the synthesis of high-quality materials without requirement of post-process purification. Crawford and coworkers successfully extended HME to organic reactions via TSE ( ). Several organic multi-component reactions have been successfully carried out, including the Petasis reaction, the first non-condensation reaction to be conducted by TSE.
These researches showed that HME is a potential mechanochemical technique that converts multistep chemical synthesis into a simpler, single-step, solvent-free process.
Three-Dimensional Printing Technology
Three-dimensional printing (3DP) is a layer-by-layer technique to produce 3D objects starting from digital models, which is increasingly popular for its widespread applications in various industrial domains such as automotive, aerospace, fashion, and defense ( ). Compared to the conventional techniques for developing dosage forms, 3DP can provide advantages such as creating more complex products, personalized products, and immediate-consumed products, especially in biomedicine field ( ). Fused deposition modeling (FDM) is a widely used extrusion-based 3DP technique, which is easily accessible, versatile, and suitable for the manufacture of single-unit dosage forms ( ). As for the coupling of HME and 3DP, the hybrid manufacturing continuous process system can offer advantages over previous techniques such as being cost-effective, enhancing the solubility and bioavailability of poorly soluble drugs, and simplifying downstream process. Figure 4 A shows schematic of the coupling of HME and 3DP (a) and a SEM image of filament produced by HME (b). Fig. 4 Schematic of the coupling of HME and three-dimensional printing. A 3DP coupled with HME process (a) and SEM of a 3D printed fiber (b) (the scale bar is 1 mm). B The 3D structure of tablet printed with shell and core by SEM (a–c) (the scale bars are 100 μm in a and 1 mm in b and c). Adapted with permission from ( , , )
Melocchi and colleagues studied the feasibility of TSE to produce various pharmaceutical grade polymers into filaments suitable for FDM to achieve different drug delivery ( ). Owing to the tight 3D structure, 3DP tablets showed the best extended drug release rate compared to the tablets compressed directly or made from HME ( ). Zhang et al . designed extruded acetaminophen-dispersed 3D printed tablets, and studied drug release rate of several 3D structures with different inner core and shell thickness ( ). Figure 4 B shows SEM picture of 3D structure of tablet printed with shell and core.
Overall, although the speed is much slower than traditional tablet process, the combination of HME and 3DP dose provides a convenient way to fabricate dosage forms with more complex structure, more desirable functions, and it is easily used for personalized administration, which is crucial in clinical treatment.
Nanotechnique
With the advent of nanotechnology and nanoscience, industries have been remarkable influenced, especially the pharmaceutical industry, indicating that the field of drug administration has expanded to nanoscale. Nanomedicine plays a vital role in the pharmaceutical industry due to its reduced particle size and improved dissolution rate. Many nanotechnique-based drug delivery products have been developed such as nanofiber, nanoparticle, nanocrystal, and nanoemulsion ( , , , ). Doxil® is the first FDA-approved nano-drug, which is used to treat cancer ( ).
In nanotechnology, several steps and batch processing are often required, which may result in inconsistent batch quality and relatively higher cost than other techniques. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a new technique to meet all the requirements of nanotechnique and overcome the drawbacks of traditional nanoproduct processing technique. To date, HME has been used as a single-step process for the preparation of nanoproducts in combination with nanotechnology. In addition to organic materials, HME is also applied to fabricate nanoformulations containing inorganic materials ( ).
Solid lipid nanoparticle (SLN) is well-known for oral and parenteral drug delivery systems. There are always multistep in the preparation of SLN, which leads to common disadvantages of nanotechniques ( ). Aiming at this issue, Patil et al . ( ) incorporated HME and high-pressure homogenization (HPH) into the manufacture of SLNs, HPH was employed for controlling particle size and HME was used for melt emulsification. Ye et al . ( ) prepared nanocrystal solid dispersions by conjugating hot melt extrusion with HPH in the same way, and HPH played an important role in increasing dissolution rate.
In addition, Baumgartner and coworkers have developed nano-extrusion (NANEX) as a new platform technology for formulation design and improving drug performance ( , ). Figure 3 C (a) showed AFM characterization of the phenytoin/Soluplus nano-extrudate prepared by nano-extrusion ( ). As a technique based on HME, NANEX allows feeding of aqueous drug solutions from side of the barrel, and then transforming aqueous nano-suspensions directly into solid nanoformulations in one-step process.
Other Innovations of HME
In addition to the innovations mentioned above, there are some other developing applications of HME.
Co-amorphous drug-amino acid system is an replacement to common amorphous formulations, and is hardly realized via HME because amino acids may degrade at temperatures above 200°C. Lenz et al . evaluated HME as a new method for the preparation of stable co-amorphous indomethacin-arginine, but phase separation also occurred depending on the preparation process ( ). Furthermore, as a new technique for preparing gel formulations, no scraping or mixing is required in the HME process. Pawar et al . ( ) had proposed an application of HME to develop a topical gel delivery system. The results showed 100% drug release in the HME gel within 12 h, which was much higher than that of the commercial product.
Co-extrusion is a novel extrusion method that extrudes multiple layers of different formulations through a single die. This simultaneous technique shows great potential in fixed-dose combinations and provides a way to properly combine various materials and different formulations ( ). Currently, there are only two commercially available coextruded pharmaceutical products, including NuvaRing® and Implanon®. Mofidfar and his colleagues prepared PCL-based fibers containing the antifungal compound clotrimazole by co-extrusion, and demonstrated its superior performance in the field of wound dressing over electrospun fibers of the same formulation ( ). The idea of co-extrusion is potential for many dosage forms, including oral, transdermal, and implant applications.
In addition, HME is also a technology for manufacturing abuse-deterrent products. Opioids tablets have an important position in the treatment of severe chronic pain coming with cancer or some other painful conditions. However, a research from patients about opioids showed a series of drug abuse in various DDSs ( ). There are many formulations that have been developed to prevent opioid misuse, such as Embeda® and Oxecta®. As an effective strategy for inhibiting the abuse of opioids, INTAC® technology combines HME with downstream processing equipment to fabricate abused-deterrent tablets ( ). Jedinger et al . proposed an abuse-deterrent formulation based on HME and coating technique ( ). In this process, antipyrine and codeine phosphate were allowed directly into molten polymer to fabricate cornstarch-based pellets coated with Aquacoat® ARC, leading to prolonged drug release over 8 h and resistance against alcohol-induced dose dumping. However, even though so many efforts have been made, no formulation is able to completely prevent drug abuse yet.
As for the clinical trials of HME systems, these cases are available on the websites ( https://clinicaltrials.gov/ ). Among these cases, Kaletra®, a sustained-release oral tablet containing lopinavir and ritonavir for HIV infections, has achieved typical success in the clinical, virological, and safety aspects in HIV infections ( ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00648999). In addition, Merck’s cholesteryl ester transfer protein inhibitor, anacetrapib, has entered phase III clinical trials for cardiovascular disease ( ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01252953), showing relatively desirable outcomes for the treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease based on clinical finding up to May 2017.
CONCLUSION
It is obvious that hot melt extrusion has developed rapidly over the past few decades, especially in the pharmaceutical field. HME is economical, time-saving, and easy to scale-up, making it a suitable approach for industrial production. Moreover, series of HME products with good clinical outcomes have been approved by FDA ( e.g. , Kaletra®, Norvir®). With the update of hot melt extrusion device, optimized screws and dies for the requirements of different formulations have been developed. HME is widely accepted by the pharmaceutical field for its applications on DDSs. In addition, HME is amplifying its advantages by combining with some other techniques such as HPH and 3D-printing for patient-centered considerations. Besides the attainment of solvent-free, one-step process, HME provides shorter processing time and is more environmentally friendly in comparison with conventional processing method.
Nevertheless, significant challenges still remain in the polymer selection of HME, thereby affecting drug delivery efficacy. Thermostability of materials is important due to the excessive temperature and high shear force during HME process. Selection of a suitable polymer for the predesigned formulation is always a time-consuming task. To test the applicability of coextruded reservoir-type system in the early product development phase, Eder et al . ( ) introduced a new screening method based on vacuum compression molding (VCM), which is helpful to adjust formulation, design co-extrusion process, and evaluate the availability of reservoir-type system containing small amount of material. This method may provide a great idea to guide other hot melt extrusion processing forms and acquire better formulations with less time and cost. Meanwhile, the proper selection of new excipients and modified polymers is beneficial to overcome the high temperature challenge in HME processing, making this technique suitable for loading thermolabile drugs ( ). Also, the pharmaceutical industry faces high investment costs and limited material volumes when adopting continuous technique.
Although advances in encapsulating macromolecules by HME have been demonstrated in recent years, the natural characteristics of macromolecules remain a major obstacle to encapsulating these thermosensitive candidates during extremely high temperature and energy input process. Therefore, more researches are required in the direction of addressing the disadvantages of HME, such as optimization of HME equipment design, development of formulations and new polymers, and further development of PAT tools.
Overall, more studies in the fields of process improvement and formulation innovation are needed for a safe, effective, and multifunctional hot melt extrusion drug delivery system. In addition, a broader combination of HME and other techniques may provide guidance for developing multiple applications in drug delivery.