INTRODUCTION
Tuberculosis (TB) is a significantly lethal, but preventable and remediable infectious disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( Mtb ) ( , ). It is one of the top 10 causes of deaths worldwide and is the foremost reason of death relating to antimicrobial resistance as well as the leading assassin of patients infected with HIV ( , ). TB is highly contagious, airborne, and may be subdivided into latent and active TB. Patients contracting latent TB are asymptomatic, but they are in a persistent state of immune response stimulation to the presence of this bacterium. An active TB infected person can infect up to 15 people annually through close contact. Despite TB being such a widespread disease, especially in developing countries, it manifests only as an extra-pulmonary disease in 8.4–13.7% cases ( , , ).
Cutaneous tuberculosis (CTB) is relatively uncommon (1–1.5% of all extra-pulmonary manifestations) and is not well-defined ( , , , , ). It is mostly observed on the face, but is also often expressed on the neck and torso ( ). Skin manifestations of infections caused by Mtb are known as true CTB, but some of the other species of the Mycobacterium genus are similarly responsible for cutaneous manifestations. Mtb is becoming more resistant to conventional treatment regimes, especially against monotherapy; and this increase in multi-drug resistant TB (MDR-TB) has also resulted in an upsurge in CTB ( , , , ). Presently, still no topical treatment exists for any of the TB infections and granting most current management regimes have proved positive, they are not completely effective, particularly with escalation in significant drug-resistant TB and MDR-TB strains. Moreover, the WHO have endorsed the administration of fixed-dose combinations to warrant proper disease management by reducing daily dosages required and to lower the risk of resistance developing ( , , ). For these reasons, it is of utmost importance to investigate topical dosage forms comprising fixed-doses for TB treatment to improve therapeutic regimens.
Utilising newly developed active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) is however challenging as many concerns exist with API effectiveness and toxicity profiles ( ). Therefore, we selected artemisone (Art) and clofazimine (CFZ) from a list of potential drugs under examination for their redox-oxidant mechanism of action coupled with a third partner, decoquinate (DQ) with a different mode of action to determine activity against TB ( ) when applied topically as a fixed-dose combination. The rationale is clarified by studying each API and briefly assessing its mechanism of action.
Art is a new semi-synthetic, second-generation derivative of artemisinin (10-alkylaminoartemisinin), which is active against all intraerythrocytic stages of the malaria protozoan parasite, Plasmodium falciparum . It portrays significantly low to no neuro- and/or cytotoxicity. Generally, artemisinins have short half-lives and are recommended to be administered in combination with other longer half-life APIs ( , , , , , ). Generally, artemisinins are believed to enhance oxidative stress in the malaria parasite by interfering with flavoenzyme disulphide reductases normally required for maintaining redox homeostasis. They overtly appear to exert oxidant activity by accepting electrons from reduced flavin cofactors in the flavoenzymes. Thereby, it is expected that the artemisinins will enhance the activity of CFZ against tuberculosis ( , , , ).
CFZ is a lipophilic riminophenazine antibiotic that tends to accumulate in the skin. It depicts anti-inflammatory characteristics, supporting its efficacy in the treatment of leprosy. This API gained recent attention due to its anti-microbial activity and has been recognised as effective against Mycobacterium leprae , Mycobacterium kansasii , and Mycobacterium avium complex ( , ). CFZ has furthermore shown in vivo and in vitro effectiveness against MDR-TB strains while depicting low toxicity ( , ). It acts on the Mtb respiratory complex NDH-2 wherein it elicits formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) via redox cycling involving its reduction to dihydroclofazimine (CFZH 2 ) by the reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH-2) cofactor associated with NADH-NDH-2 followed by oxidation of CFZH 2 by oxygen; the concomitant reduction of oxygen generates ROS. The process overall is associated with enhanced consumption of NADH, thus increasing oxidative stress. The resultant effect of this redox API is consequently to increase the effect of the oxidant API ( , ), which in this study is Art. Thus, other agents capable of intercepting electron flow in coupled systems and generating ROS are likely to exert cytotoxicity.
DQ is a quinolone and an approved veterinary drug against avian coccidiosis which displays possible anti-TB activity due to its high lipophilicity. DQ was chosen to complement Art and CFZ as it exerts its activity against veterinary parasites through disruption of the electron transport in the mitochondrial cytochrome system of coccidian, rendering suppression of resistance ( , ).
Delivery of APIs into the skin is a challenging endeavour mainly attributed to the barrier function of the stratum corneum. APIs should retain lipophilic and hydrophilic properties (aqueous solubility > 1 mg/ml; log D < 3) for effective skin penetration ( , ). These chosen APIs do not possess ideal characteristics for topical delivery. They are not only poorly aqueous soluble (Art = 89.0 mg/L; CFZ = 10.0 mg/L; DQ < 60.0 μg/L), but both CFZ and DQ are highly lipophilic as well; with log D-values of 7.66 and 7.80, respectively. Art has a more favourable log D of 2.49 ( , , , ). To enhance permeability, vesicles were chosen as carrier systems due to their unique ability to encapsulate both hydrophilic and lipophilic APIs, which is especially supportive when formulating a combination of Art, CFZ and DQ ( , , , , , ). Vesicles enable topical delivery of difficult to deliver APIs into the skin. They possess aqueous centres (where Art can concentrate) and lipid bilayers (where CFZ and DQ can concentrate); and create a “depot-effect”, concentrating APIs in the skin where CTB normally resides ( , , , ). Though, various vesicle types exist, each pertaining their own advantages; for this study, liposomes, niosomes and transferosomes were chosen. Since this is an explorative study where the particular API combination in vesicles has not yet been researched before, and exact considerations have not been set, each API was included in a 1% concentration as preformulation studies indicated that this concentration can be adequately analysed and the combination formulation containing 1% of each API was still deemed stable.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Clofazimine was kindly donated by Cipla Pty Ltd. (Mumbai, India). Artemisone was originally prepared by Bayer AG, Leverkusen, and was purified by recrystallization according to the literature method ( , ). Decoquinate was purchased from Shanghai Hohance Chemicals, China, and used as received. The vesicles were prepared using L-α-phosphatidylcholine from egg yolk ~ 60% (Sigma-Aldrich, South Africa), cell culture suitable cholesterol (Sigma-Aldrich, South Africa), cell culture tested Tween® 20 (Sigma-Aldrich, South Africa) and absolute ethanol from Associated Chemical Enterprises (ACE) in South Africa. The water was purified by a Milli-Q® water purification system from Millipore® (USA). Methanol (ACE, South Africa) and acetone (ACE, South Africa) were used as lipid solvents. Glass beads (2 mm diameter, Merck, Germany) were used in the thin film manufacturing method. All chemicals employed were of analytical grade.
Methods
Preparation of Vesicles
A modified thin-film hydration method was employed to formulate the vesicles ( , ). Vesicles were prepared as a 5% lipophilic phase in a phosphate buffer solution (pH 5.5). The lipophilic APIs were subsequently added to the lipophilic phase to promote accumulation in the vesicles. The lipophilic phase of the liposomes consisted of phosphatidylcholine (PC) and cholesterol in a 3:2 ratio ( w / v ); transferosomes comprised PC and absolute ethanol (4:1 w / v ) and niosomes contained Tween® 20 and cholesterol (2:1 w / v ). The lipophilic phase was dissolved in an acetone:methanol (2:1 v / v ) mixture and the solvent evaporated at 45 °C. A thin lipid film was created to which the aqueous phase was added. Glass beads were transferred into the beaker, which was placed in a sonicator bath for 15 min. Thereafter, the glass beads were removed and the vesicle dispersion probe sonicated for 6 min at 2 min intervals. Vesicle dispersions were retained at 4 °C for at least 2 h ensuring adequate vesicle formation.
Pre-formulation and Characterisation
All pre-formulation and characterisation experiments were conducted in triplicate, and the mean values utilised to establish trends and conclusions.
Isothermal Calorimetry
Isothermal microcalorimetry was utilised to determine the compatibility between the three APIs and the vesicle components. A 2277 Thermal Activity Monitor (TAMIII; TA Instruments, USA), equipped with an oil bath with a stability of ± 100 μK over 24 h was employed. The temperature was maintained at 40 °C and a sample mass of 70 mg was retained for each sample. Heat flow was measured for each single component to establish a baseline, where after various component combinations were tested. Calorimetric output observed by an individual component was summarised as a hypothetical response, which is the expected calorimetric output if no interaction is displayed between components. The measured calorimetric response will however differ from the hypothetical response if there is an interaction. Normally, an observed change in heat flow (OCHF) higher than 100 nW/g together with observed slopes on the heat flow graphs are deliberated significant, indicating interaction between components.
Encapsulation Efficiency
For determining encapsulation efficiency (EE), the centrifugation separation method was used employing an Eppendorf® 5804 R centrifuge equipped with an A-4-44 rotor. Selected dispersions were centrifuged at 2000 g for 20 min for the unentrapped API to form a pellet in the tube ( ). The unentrapped API was subtracted from the initial added API and a percentage calculated, signifying the EE.
Zeta-Potential, Size Distribution and Vesicle Size
Zeta-potential, as well as vesicle size and distribution, were determined through dynamic light scattering using a Zetasizer Nano® ZS (Malvern® Instruments Ltd., Worcestershire, UK) at 25 °C. Zeta-potential is the electrostatic potential at interfaces and determines the electrostatic repulsion between particles in a system. The higher the zeta-potential, the stronger the repulsion and the more stable the colloidal system becomes where aggregation is prevented. A value above 30 mV or below − 30 mV typically indicates high stability ( , ).
The different vesicles were imaged and their sizes measured using the FEI Tecnai G2 20S-Twin TEM at 120 kV. A transmission electron microscope (TEM) equipped with a Gatan® bottom mount camera using DigitalMicrograph® software for imaging and measuring vesicle size was employed.
pH and Viscosity
pH was determined for each dispersion using a Mettler® Toledo pH meter (Mettler® Toledo International Inc., USA) with a Mettler® Toledo Inlab® 410 NTC electrode 9823.
Viscosity was measured with a Brookfield® Viscometer model DV2T™ (Stoughton, USA) connected to a circulating water bath with a Brookfield® temperature controller to maintain the temperature in the water jacket at 25 ± 1.0 °C. A SC4-18 spindle was employed at 100 rpm, where the torque was approximately 20%.
Topical Delivery
Skin Preparation
Black skin donated by anonymous female patients who underwent abdominoplastic surgery was used for transdermal diffusion studies. Ethical approval for procurement and preparation of skin was issued by the Research Ethics committee of the North-West University with reference number: NWU-00114-11-A5. Skin was stored at − 20 °C for no longer than 6 months. Prior to experimentation, the skin was allowed to thaw at room temperature and visually inspected for defects such as stretch marks and/or holes/large hair follicles, in which case it was discarded. The skin was cut into pieces of approximately 2 cm × 4 cm and 400 μm thick with a Zimmer® electric dermatome model 8821. Skin pieces were placed on Whatman® filter paper, cut into circles and covered in aluminium foil prior to storage in a freezer at − 20 °C until the experiments were conducted (within 24 h).
Skin Diffusion Studies
In vitro skin diffusion studies were performed utilising ten vertical Franz diffusion cells ( n = 10) for each dispersion ( ). Skin circles were mounted between a receptor and a donor compartment. The receptor phase consisted of phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.4) and a magnetic stirrer driven at 720 rpm, whereas the donor compartment contained the vesicle dispersion. The Franz cells were placed in a water bath maintained at 37 °C and samples were withdrawn every hour for 12 h. Samples were analysed in triplicate by means of a validated HPLC method.
Tape Stripping
Post 12 h diffusion studies, the skin circles were removed from the Franz cells and fixed onto a board with Whatman® filter paper. All excess dispersion was dabbed from the skin surface. For tape stripping, 15 strips of clear 3M Scotch® tape were used and an extra two strips for cleaning. The strips were utilised to remove the stratum corneum-epidermis (SCE), which was then put into a polytop containing 5 ml absolute ethanol and placed in the refrigerator (2–8 °C) for approximately 8 h. The remaining dermis (EE) of the diffusion area (circular imprint of the donor phase is indicative of this area) was cut into small pieces to increase the surface area, and transferred into a polytop with 5 ml absolute ethanol and stored between 2 and 8 °C for approximately 8 h. Thereafter, the ethanol was filtered, using a 0.45 μm filter, and analysed in triplicate by means of HPLC.
Efficacy Against Tuberculosis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( Mtb ) H37Rv was inoculated in a 1:10 dilution from stock cultures in a 25 cm 3 tissue flask for 4 days until the optical density at 600 nm (OD 600 ) reached 0.6. These cultures were sub-cultured in 1:5 dilutions into a 75-cm 3 tissue flask until OD 600 reached 0.3 for the experiment. Aliquots of 10 ml from this culture were transferred into 25 cm 3 tissue flasks. The concentrations that showed 50% or less Mtb growth inhibition of Art, CFZ and DQ ranged from 12.5, 10.5 and 11.9 μM, respectively. Therefore, the dispersions containing a single API were tested in triplicate at 12.5 μM as CFZ was considered most active and thus its concentration ( ) was utilised as a benchmark for the other APIs. Each culture flask was treated with 12.5 μM API for 24 h and one control flask contained no API.
After 24 h post-inoculation and incubation at 37 °C, 200 μl samples from each culture flask were centrifuged, resuspended, washed twice in 7H9 broth and plated on 7H11 agar. After 12–15 days of incubation at 37 °C the CFUs were enumerated and percentage inhibition calculated relative to the untreated control.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Pre-formulation and Characterisation
Isothermal Calorimetry
It was established that Art, CFZ and DQ were compatible (Fig. 1 ) in the solid-state form. This was deduced from the resulting heat flow graph where the interaction curve did not present with a clearly distinguishable slope and the difference (3.40 nW/g) between the theoretically calculated and experimentally measured heat flow was considered insignificant ( ). Conversely, it was found that both Art and CFZ are incompatible with PC (OCHF > 100 nW/g), which might be ascribed to the oxidative characteristic of PC. Additionally, all three APIs in combination with Tween® 20 indicated incompatibility (Fig. 2 ) with an interaction average heat flow of − 5.47 ± 6.03 μW/g (OCHF = 11.5 μW/g). All other combinations tested proofed however compatible (Table I ). It should be noted that the initial compatibility testing was performed with the APIs and excipients being in the solid state. Fig. 1 Heat flow versus time graph obtained for a combination of Art, CFZ and DQ Fig. 2 Heat flow data obtained for Art, CFZ, DQ and Tween®20 Table I Compatibility Report Indicating the Average Interaction Heat Flow (μW/g) of Different Compounds Tested Combinations tested Average interaction heat flow (μW/g) Compatibility Art + CFZ + DQ 14.57 ± 17.97 Compatible Art + PC 18.19 ± 22.68 Incompatible CFZ + PC 32.71 ± 33.66 Incompatible DQ + PC 79.89 ± 80.20 Compatible Art + CFZ + DQ + PC 34.36 ± 36.25 Insignificant incompatibility Art + Cholesterol − 15.71 ± 19.06 Insignificant incompatibility CFZ + Cholesterol 6.25 ± 6.73 Compatible DQ + Cholesterol 13.81 ± 18.73 Compatible Art + CFZ + DQ + Cholesterol 11.44 ± 12.76 Compatible PC + Cholesterol 3.68 ± 26.20 Compatible Art + Tween® 20 − 7.99 ± 8.34 Incompatible CFZ + Tween® 20 − 11.56 ± 12.03 Incompatible DQ + Tween® 20 − 85.15 ± 86.80 Incompatible PC + Tween® 20 − 1.49 ± 4.14 Compatible Cholesterol + Tween® 20 0.38 ± 3.43 Compatible Art +DQ + Tween® 20 − 5.89 ± 6.26 Insignificant incompatibility CFZ + DQ + Tween® 20 − 7.03 ± 7.85 Incompatible Art + CFZ + Tween® 20 − 10.82 ± 11.17 Incompatible Art + CFZ + DQ + Tween® 20 − 5.47 ± 6.03 Incompatible Liposomes + Art 1.87 ± 2.51 Insignificant incompatibility Liposomes + CFZ 21.06 ± 26.45 Insignificant incompatibility Liposomes + DQ 0.25 ± 1.15 Compatible Liposomes + Art + CFZ + DQ 2.28 ± 2.86 Compatible Transferosomes + Art 0.65 ± 1.28 Compatible Transferosomes + CFZ 0.72 ± 2.88 Compatible Transferosomes + DQ − 0.04 ± 1.27 Compatible Transferosomes + Art + CFZ + DQ 4.00 ± 4.50 Compatible Niosomes + Art 0.75 ± 1.25 Insignificant incompatibility Niosomes + CFZ 0.14 ± 0.86 Compatible Niosomes + DQ 0.61 ± 0.95 Compatible Niosomes + Art + CFZ + DQ − 2.43 ± 3.02 Compatible
The next step was to test the liposome, transferosome and niosome dispersions in terms of compatibility where cholesterol was added during dispersion formulation. From the heat flow data, it could be concluded that no incompatibilities (OCHF < 100 nW/g) between the different dispersions and APIs existed and it could be hypothesised that the addition of cholesterol and the preparation method either mask incompatibilities or stabilise the individual compounds. Overall, the niosomes displayed the highest compatibility of all the tested dispersions, with the lowest observed interaction errors (Table I ).
Encapsulation Efficiency
Vesicles containing 1% API depicted an EE higher than 85% as portrayed in Table II . DQ entrapped within the combination transferosome dispersion displayed the highest EE (98.50%), whereas Art in the transferosome (single) dispersion rendered the lowest (85.39%) EE. Overall, liposomes (91.23–96.87%) and niosomes (93.77–97.94%) delivered relatively consistent EEs. Table II Encapsulation Efficiency (%) of Vesicle Dispersions Containing 1% API(s) API Liposomes Niosomes Transferosomes Single API dispersions Art 96.54 94.34 85.39 CFZ 94.04 97.94 87.33 DQ 96.39 93.12 97.24 Combination Art 96.87 93.77 87.24 CFZ 91.23 95.54 87.89 DQ 94.32 92.71 98.50
Zeta-Potential, Size Distribution and Vesicle Size
In order to establish the influence of increasing API concentration on the size and stability of the selected vesicles, blank dispersions with no APIs were compared to dispersions comprising 1% API(s). For TEM analysis, vesicles were prepared with pure water as the aqueous phase, since phosphate buffer solution crystallises, which may damage the instrument. Figure 3 illustrates examples of the different vesicles formulated. Fig. 3 TEM imaging illustrating a liposomes, b niosomes and c transferosomes prepared with pure water
As stated, a higher zeta-potential value specifies a more stable colloidal system. In addition, traditional systems normally depict a droplet charge that is negative due to the presence of free fatty acids in the oil phase ( , ). The polydispersity index (PDI), conversely, indicates size distribution, where a dispersion is considered uniform if the particles are similar in size, mass or shape. A PDI below 0.6 is usually indicative of a uniform dispersion ( ). Literature state that the smaller and more uniform the droplet size, the higher API delivery is and the more robust vesicle formulation is to any kind of instabilities, e.g. flocculation or coalescence ( , , ). Data collected for zeta-potential, size and size distribution of the different dispersions are presented in Table III where values depicted in bold indicate unstable or non-uniform dispersions. Table III Zeta-potential, Size and Size Distribution (PDI) of the Different Dispersions Vesicle Dispersion Zeta-potential (mV) Size (nm) PDI Liposomes Blank − 53.3 ± 5.9 154.0 0.306 Art − 55.1 ± 4.5 146.6 0.239 CFZ − 31.5 ± 4.8 481.7 0.618 DQ − 57.5 ± 5.3 252.7 0.452 Combination − 21.6 ± 4.6 824.1 0.673 Niosomes Blank − 43.3 ± 5.5 167.5 0.525 Art − 17.0 ± 3.8 437.4 0.481 CFZ − 8.5 ± 3.5 2461.0 0.939 DQ − 11.5 ± 4.3 670.1 0.628 Combination − 6.6 ± 4.8 984.9 0.925 Transferosomes Blank − 35.7 ± 5.3 106.3 0.257 Art − 43.9 ± 8.9 123.7 0.394 CFZ − 5.5 ± 3.3 1222.0 0.892 DQ − 44.7 ± 5.9 367.5 0.482 Combination − 15.5 ± 3.8 524.7 0.696
Considering vesicle type, it is clear that liposomes proofed most stable with overall higher zeta-potential ( p < 0.05); and lower droplet size ( p < 0.05) and PDI ( p < 0.05) values, followed by transferosomes. Therefore, these dispersions are thought to be robust and will probably be able to deliver their API content more effectively. However, the incorporation of the API combination rendered larger, unstable vesicles regardless the type of vesicles utilised. Conversely, niosomes containing API(s) were all deliberated unstable (< − 30 mV). These vesicles furthermore displayed overall the highest average droplet size (944.18 nm) and PDI (0.6996) values. Interesting to note regarding the APIs is that dispersions comprising either Art or DQ could be considered more stable with relative narrow size distributions (PDI < 0.6) and vesicle sizes comparable to that of the blank dispersions. Generally, the inclusion of an API caused enlargement of the different vesicles as well as an increase in the PDI regardless the vesicle type. The addition of CFZ seems to have the most negative effect on the stability, size and uniformity of the various vesicle types as all of these vesicles are considered the largest and displayed the lowest zeta-potential and highest PDI values. It therefore appears as if the inclusion of CFZ is most responsible for the instability and enlargement of the different API combination vesicle types.
pH and Viscosity
The buffer used to formulate the vesicles was prepared at 1.5 standard strength, since a pilot study indicated that Art in liposomes lowers the pH to as low as 3.17 at 25 °C. Dispersions were produced to be applied topically, thus the pH needs to be buffered between 4 and 9 in order to avoid skin irritation ( ).
Generally, it is assumed that more viscous formulations will inhibit or eliminate skin partitioning and absorption of molecules within a formulation, partly due to poor skin distribution. This is not always the case, since it was found that thin layers of a more viscous formulation may enhance skin permeation due to the formation of an occlusive layer ( ). The viscosities of the dispersions were measured at 10 s intervals and the values obtained were relatively similar to that of water, which has a viscosity of 1 mPa s at 20 °C or 0.89 mPa s at 25 °C ( ). Data collected for pH and viscosity are listed in Table IV . Table IV The pH and Viscosity of 1% API Dispersions at 25 ± 1.0 °C Vesicle Dispersion pH Viscosity (mPa.s) Liposomes Blank 5.50 1.88 Art 5.51 1.89 CFZ 5.49 2.44 DQ 5.51 1.87 Combination 5.44 2.89 Niosomes Blank 5.19 1.71 Art 5.11 1.71 CFZ 5.24 1.66 DQ 5.06 1.69 Combination 5.75 1.99 Transferosomes Blank 5.37 1.41 Art 5.36 1.45 CFZ 5.53 1.54 DQ 5.34 1.47 Combination 5.43 1.78
Generally, no significant differences ( p > 0.05) were obtained for pH or viscosity. The pH was maintained between 5 and 6, which is ideal for topical application. Liposomes displayed slightly higher viscosity and pH-values, whereas transferosomes depicted the lowest values. Considering API inclusion, the same trend was followed as with zeta-potential where vesicles comprising Art or DQ portrayed similar viscosity and pH-values, and vesicles which included CFZ (including combination vesicles) depicted marginally higher values. These findings are contradictory to literature that found that viscosity is typically lower the higher the zeta-potential ( , ). Overall, the dispersions were slightly more viscous than water, though not too viscous to form an occlusive layer; and good spreadability was still maintained.
Skin Diffusion Studies
For skin diffusion studies, samples tested were a combination of all APIs incorporated into liposomes, niosomes or transferosomes, as well as a sample containing only the APIs with no carrier system included. This was to ascertain whether the carrier system had a significant impact on the topical delivery of the APIs. None of the samples tested delivered any APIs into the receptor phase after 12 h. Thus, it is likely that if these samples were applied to a patient, the APIs would not pass through the skin into the systemic circulation. Tape stripping data indicated that Art was not detected in the skin (Fig. 4 ), though this may not mean that it was not present, but simply that the concentration may be too low to be detected. Fig. 4 Average concentrations of APIs present in the stratum corneum-epidermis (SCE) and epidermis-dermis (ED) after tape stripping
Data clearly indicate that CFZ and DQ can be delivered topically, with niosomes and transferosomes delivering the highest average concentrations. DQ alone appeared at higher concentrations in the ED compared to this API encapsulated in either the liposome or niosome dispersions. The transferosome dispersion expectedly elicited the most favourable results overall, with a CFZ concentration as high as 2.18 μg/ml present in the SCE and 0.73 μg/ml in the ED. As stated these vesicles proofed comparatively smaller than the other vesicle types and furthermore, transferosomes were specifically developed to alter their membrane structure to enable penetration through narrow skin pores ( , ). DQ presented a higher concentration in the SCE in the niosome dispersion (1.54 μg/ml) than in the transferosome dispersion (1.32 μg/ml), though the concentration DQ in the ED for the transferosome dispersion (0.59 μg/ml) was the highest of all the dispersions tested. This indicates that a higher concentration API will reach the deeper layers of the skin when applied as a transferosome dispersion, where the APIs are required for optimal activity. Even higher concentrations of the APIs will possibly be delivered into the skin of a patient with CTB, since CTB is a disease that damages the skin and therefore the stratum corneum will not be intact.
Efficacy Against Tuberculosis
Table V presents the data obtained from efficacy studies against TB for 1% API dispersions evaluated. All the dispersions and APIs tested depicted some activity against TB. Remarkably, even the blank vesicles displayed some activity, indicating that one or more of the vesicle components may have some degree of activity against TB. Moreover, the blank transferosomes could be considered most potent of the blank vesicles, whereas blank liposomes only showed minimal activity. Interestingly both transferosomes and liposomes comprise PC, though the PC concentration is higher in transferosomes. Acton, ( ) reported that PC has no activity against TB, however, this compound is highly lipophilic and results might be explained by an occlusion effect of the lipids on the cells as well as the larger shape and size of the transferosomes, causing cell death. Literature also states that Mtb uses host cholesterol for growth and energy, and a high cholesterol diet can enhance bacterial load ( ). Transferosomes do not contain any cholesterol, but liposomes and niosomes (to a lesser extent) do. The cholesterol might therefore have been responsible for some bacterial growth and overall counteracted activity of the vesicles. Table V Growth Inhibition (%) of the APIs in Solid Form, as well as in the Different Dispersions API Liposomes Niosomes Transferosomes Art 28 31 20 38 CFZ 42 42 52 38 DQ 28 29 8 35 Combination – 42 38 12 Blank – 12 36 42
In terms of API activity, CFZ alone was most active, displaying 42% inhibition, whereas no clear distinction could be concluded between Art and DQ activity (28%). Even when the selected API(s) were included in the different vesicles, CFZ overall displayed highest average inhibition (43.5%) with no clear distinction between Art (29.3%) and DQ (25.0%) activity. The combination of either Art or DQ in transferosomes or liposomes rendered increased activity against TB. This increased activity was however only marginally if liposomes were utilised, indicating again that cholesterol might have negatively affected the anti-TB effect. Once included into niosomes, it is observed that both the activity of Art and DQ (even more) is considerably decreased. As identified earlier, none of the APIs is considered compatible with Tween® 20, one of the main constituents of niosomes. DQ displayed the highest interaction heat flow (Table I ) of the APIs, implying the highest degree of interaction with Tween® 20; and this might therefore be the reason for its significant decrease in anti-TB activity (8%) as some negative interaction probably occurred. CFZ included in vesicles, on the other hand, displayed converse results as it exhibited enhanced activity when included into niosomes, relatively lower activity in transferosomes and no differences in activity was observed when incorporated into liposomes. CFZ was rendered incompatible with PC and therefore it is postulated that this incompatibility in liposomes and transferosomes had a negative effect on its anti-TB activity when included into one of these vesicle types. However, when incorporated into niosomes, its anti-TB activity increased with 10%, rendering the highest activity obtained. A probable synergistic effect that demands further investigation may consequently exist between CFZ and Tween® 20.
Finally, the API combination overall did portray an average inhibition of 30.67%; however, this was similar to the anti-TB activity of the blank vesicles (30.0%). Of the combination dispersions, liposomes showed the highest activity (42%) and transferosomes were least active (12%). Again, the different constituents of the vesicles and the interactions with the APIs might have had a distinct role in the anti-TB activity. In conclusion, the API combination displayed no significant synergistic effect on the growth inhibition of TB-cells. Niosomes comprising CFZ alone rendered the highest anti-TB activity and further investigation into the activity of blank transferosomes against TB will be beneficial.
CONCLUSIONS
Liposomes, niosomes and transferosomes were successfully prepared containing sufficient Art, DQ and CFZ. It was established that an increase in API concentration had a definite influence on vesicle stability and size. The higher the concentration API in the vesicles, the higher the API EE and the larger the vesicle size and size distribution. With size increase, however, vesicle stability decreased probably owing to the lipophilic layers not being packed as tightly, or due to the electrostatic charge of the layers being influenced by the encapsulated API ( , , ). CFZ inclusion seems to have the most negative effect on vesicle stability, size and uniformity. Conversely, liposomes proofed meaningfully robust and niosomes could be considered unstable. Overall, formulation rendered dispersions with acceptable viscosity and good spreadability.
In vitro skin diffusion studies indicated that DQ and CFZ could be delivered into the skin, although not into the receptor phase, which would result in ingress of the API into the systemic circulation. Tape stripping data revealed that transferosomes delivered the highest average concentrations of CFZ and DQ into the skin. Transferosomes contain no cholesterol, unlike niosomes and liposomes; and are therefore possibly less lipophilic. For this reason, the highly lipophilic APIs are less likely to remain within the transferosomes and may thus penetrate more freely into the skin.
Though no definite conclusions can be drawn from the Mtb efficacy data it could be deduced that all the dispersions and APIs tested depicted some activity against TB. The API combination rendered no significant synergistic effect on the growth inhibition of TB-cells; and although inclusion of either Art or DQ in transferosomes or liposomes enhanced anti-TB activity, it could not be considered advantageous. On the other hand, niosomes that only contained CFZ displayed considerably higher anti-TB activity. Therefore, a plausible synergistic effect that demands further enquiry may thus exist between CFZ and Tween® 20. CFZ, which was introduced in the 1990s, is a well-documented anti-TB API, however, when delivered orally it was found to induce skin pigmentation due to ceroid lipofuscinosis ( , ). Delivering CFZ topically may circumvent or limit severe skin pigmentation and will be advantageous for treatment of CTB.
For these reasons, it is suggested that development of different vesicles containing CFZ for topical distribution ought to be considered. Incorporating additional charged excipients for stabilisation, or utilising different excipients for preparation of liposomes, transferosomes and niosomes should furthermore be investigated. Some studies have to be undertaken where the redox-oxidant mechanism of action of Art and CFZ, coupled DQ are refined in terms of the ratio of each API that should be included in order for this redox-oxidant reaction to be optimised. Finally, the basis for the activities of the blank transferosomes against Mtb needs to be assessed as this may assist in developing newer treatment regimens for TB.