INTRODUCTION
Starch is a natural polymer that has been extensively used in the pharmaceutical industry ( ). Its processability, biocompatibility, and acceptance by the regulatory agencies make it a suitable excipient for a wide array of applications including serving as a filler, binder, emulsifier, and thickening agent ( , , , ). Amylose and amylopectin are the major components of starch, where the composition of these two α-D-glucan molecules varies according to the plant species ( ). Amylose is a linear chain of glucose molecules linked together through α-1,4 glycosidic bonds. In contrast, amylopectin has a regular branching pattern due to the formation of α-1,6 glycosidic bonds. A deficiency in starch debranching enzymes (DBE) associated with plant genetic mutation was found to result in the synthesis of a water-soluble and highly branched form of α-D-glucan, called phytoglycogen ( ).
The sugary-1 mutant of maize produces phytoglycogen instead of starch due to compromised activity of an isoamylase-type DBE known as SU1 ( ). The maize kernel is the largest source of phytoglycogen, and the extraction technique has been described in the literature ( ). Phytoglycogen is a dendrimer-like biopolymer (DLB), where the core-shell structure enables the formation of carbohydrate-based nanoparticles. Similar to dendrimers, phytoglycogen and its derivatives can interact with drug molecules and potentially act as a stabilizing and solubilizing agent in the formulation of poorly water-soluble drugs. For example, Chen and coworkers demonstrated that the addition of phytoglycogen in the formulation of quercetin led to a reduced crystallinity of the solid dispersion, improved drug apparent solubility (Sol app ), and enhanced trans-epithelial drug transport ( ). However, one particular issue that has, as of yet, been unresolved is determining the difference between the free drug in solution and that complexed within the dendrimer.
It is possible to fine-tune the stability and/or solubility-enhancing effects of phytoglycogen via its interaction with drug molecules by utilizing property-based chemical modifications that can tailor the surface properties for specific drug association. Some examples of these techniques include internal space enlargement using β-amylase-controlled hydrolysis and hydrophobic-hydrophilic adjustment via attachment of different functional groups to the interior region or the outer surface of phytoglycogen ( ). Recent advances in the chemical processing of starch have facilitated the modification of native starch into many derivatives possessing different physicochemical properties ( , ). Phytoglycogen has been reported to be susceptible to these modifications as well ( ). In an experiment conducted by Scheffler et al. , octenyl succinate-grafted starch and phytoglycogen were prepared ( , ). The resulting phytoglycogen octenyl succinate was found to have a lower digestibility and improved emulsification properties compared to the derivative prepared from waxy corn starch. Introduction of negative charges and lipophilicity were also obtained via octenyl succinylation—both of which are adjustable based on the degree of substitution (DS) ( ). Such modifications may enable the selection of a phytoglycogen derivative with increased loading capacity for the particular drug of interest and provide favorable water interactions on the surrounding surface.
A disruption in the crystalline lattice of a therapeutic entity by random distribution in polymers will generally enable the formation of a higher energy amorphous form with increased water solubility ( ). To maximize the drug absorption across the intestinal epithelium, where either solubility or dissolution-limited behavior is observed, supersaturation must be sustained in the gastrointestinal tract to increase absorption. However, the amorphous state is a thermodynamically unstable form, which can be readily converted to a lower energy crystalline material negating the solubility advantage associated with supersaturation depending on the rates of nucleation kinetics comparative to polymer association ( ). Polymeric matrices are therefore typically selected to maintain the physical stability of the amorphous form during production, storage, and for increasing the intestinal supersaturation for a prolonged period by analyzing the polymer’s potential to inhibit crystallization. The addition of a polymeric carrier can lead to a reduction in the molecular mobility and an antiplasticization effect associated with the increase in the glass transition temperature. The intermolecular interaction of the drug is interrupted by the formation of drug-polymer interaction in polymeric-based amorphous solid dispersion (ASD).
The addition of polymeric excipients ( e.g. , hydroxypropyl methylcellulose acetate succinate (HPMCAS), polyvinylpyrrolidone/vinyl acetate (PVPVA), and Soluplus®) has traditionally been used as a formulation strategy to combat the stability issues in ASD formulation ( , , , ). The polymer can act as a crystallization inhibitor and potentially increase amorphous stability during storage and upon exposure to an aqueous environment. In these systems, the drug molecules are dispersed within the polymeric matrix, and the intermolecular interaction between the drug and polymer plays an important role in hindering the crystallization of amorphous solid. The presence of a hydrophilic polymer can also lead to an increased Sol app of the molecularly dispersed drug over the neat amorphous form. Biomaterial-based excipients made from phytoglycogen can provide an alternative approach to solving stability- and solubility-related problems for lipophilic drug compounds in ASD formulation. This new technology may potentially become a useful tool to mitigate challenges ( e.g. , toxicity, limited drug-excipient interaction, etc. ) associated with synthetic dendrimers and other currently available polymers ( ).
The main goal in this study is to evaluate the potential application of proprietary DLB compounds (generously donated from Phytoption LLC, West Lafayette, IN; chemical structures not disclosed) as polymeric excipients by focusing on the changes in the physical stability and assessing the in vitro cellular absorption potential of lipophilic drugs in these binary ASD systems. It should be noted that the dendrimers were provided for proof-of-concept research to investigate heterogeneous carriers for the different agents and their potential. The following experiments were conducted in the study to compare the performance of three phytoglycogen derivatives—DLB1, DLB2, and DLB3—with commercially available excipients including HPMCAS, PVPVA, and Soluplus® to: (1) perform powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) to analyze formation and physical stability of ASD formulations, (2) determine mitochondrial-based toxicity using the MTT assay and investigate the potential effect of DLBs on cellular viability, and (3) assess drug permeability and flux across Caco-2 cell monolayers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
The amorphous solid dispersions utilized in these studies were prepared and generously provided by Phytoption (West Lafayette, IN). Drug compounds (niclosamide, celecoxib, and resveratrol), HPMCAS, PVPVA (Kollidon® VA 64), Soluplus®, and DLB excipients were supplied by the same provider. Fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin-streptomycin, nonessential amino acids (NEAA), trypsin-EDTA, Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS), phosphate buffer saline (PBS), and 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) reagent were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). L-glutamine was purchased from Mediatech, Inc. (Herndon, VA). Polystyrene T-75 culture flasks, Transwell® permeable supports, and all other supplies were obtained from Corning, Inc. (Corning, NY). Caco-2 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC; Manassas, VA).
Powder X-ray Diffraction
PXRD patterns for the amorphous solid dispersions were developed using Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, Inc., The Woodlands, TX) equipped with a Cu-Kα radiation and operated at 40 kV and 40 mA. The samples were scanned from 5° to 40° 2 θ at a speed of 2° per minute with 0.04° step size. To access the amorphous stability of the formulations over time, the samples were also analyzed at 2- and 4-week times after being stored at 40°C and 75% relative humidity (RH). The PXRD patterns were also obtained for crystalline drugs in the absence of the excipients for reference.
Cell Viability Assay
Caco-2 cells (passage 55) were seeded at 30,000 cells/well in 96-well plate coated with collagen type I. Medium replacement took place every 2 days. MTT was conducted after 3 days, when the cells reached approximately 95% confluency ( , ). Next, the media were removed, and the cells were washed with PBS. HBSS containing appropriate amounts of native or modified phytoglycogens was added. After a 3-h incubation, 20 μL of MTT (5 mg/mL in HBSS) was added to the cells. After an additional 4 h of incubation, HBSS was removed, and 100 μL solution of dimethyl sulfoxide was added followed by overnight agitation. The absorbance was measured at 560 nm. Cell viability can be calculated based on the ratio between treated and untreated (control) cells. $$ \mathrm{Cell}\ \mathrm{Viability}\ \left(\%\right)=\frac{\mathrm{Abs}.\kern0.5em \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{treated}\ \mathrm{sample}}{\mathrm{Abs}.\kern0.5em \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{control}\ \mathrm{cells}}\times 100 $$ (1)
Permeability Studies
Caco-2 cell monolayer permeability studies were conducted using the same procedure as described by Roth et al. ( ). Briefly, Caco-2 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1× nonessential amino acids, penicillin-streptomycin, and 2 mM glutamine. The cells were incubated at 37°C, 5% CO 2 , and 90% RH. To maintain the cell culture, the medium was changed every 2 days and cell passaging was performed at 80–90% confluence. With respect to the permeability study, the cells (passages 47 to 51) were seeded on a polyester membrane treated with collagen at a density of 8 × 10 4 cells/cm 2 ( , ). All permeation studies were conducted using Caco-2 cell monolayers at 21 to 25 days postseeding. The transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) measurements ensured the integrity of the cellular barrier (data not shown). Prior to the transport experiment, the residual compounds were rinsed off a couple of times using PBS following the culture medium removal. The cell monolayers were then incubated for 10 min with a third rinse of HBSS at 37°C immediately before the study.
The samples were prepared by adding 10 g of ASD to 10 mL of HBSS followed by vortex mixing at 37°C for 20 min. After centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 min, the supernatant was added to the donor (apical) compartment with fresh HBSS in the receiver (basolateral) compartment of the Transwell®. Samples were subsequently collected at 30, 60, 90, 120, and 180 min from the basolateral compartment for analysis. The remainder of the supernatant was used to measure the initial donor concentration. The drug concentration at each sampling time was then determined using HPLC on an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC system coupled with an UV-vis detector. A reverse phase C18 column 250 × 4.6 mm, 5 μm was used as the stationary phase with a constant flow rate of 1 mL/min. Isocratic elution was used for niclosamide, celecoxib, and resveratrol with water to acetonitrile ratio of 40:60, 40:60, and 65:35, respectively. The mobile phase was prepared using filtered distilled-deionized water and HPLC-grade acetonitrile with 0.1% of formic acid added to both components. The UV absorption wavelengths were 244 nm for niclosamide, 254 nm for celecoxib, and 303 nm for resveratrol. The drug concentration was determined using standard curve based on the AUC value of the appropriate peak. The experiment was conducted under sink condition for all the samples over a 180-min duration except for the samples containing crystalline drugs, celecoxib-PVPVA, and resveratrol-Soluplus®. The drug concentration in the receiver compartment was below 10% of the donor compartment concentration, sink conditions were fulfilled, and the apparent permeability coefficient ( P app ) was calculated using the following equation. $$ {P}_{\mathrm{app}}=\frac{\mathrm{d}M/\mathrm{d}t}{C_0\bullet A} $$ (2)
The steady-state appearance rate of the drug ( M ) in the receiver compartment is denoted by d M /d t , C 0 represents the initial concentration in the donor compartment, and A is the surface area of the filter membrane.
Alternatively, a general equation that does not require sink condition was also used to calculate the P app by nonlinear curve fitting of the experimentally measured concentrations with the predicted values. The concentration of the drug in the receiver at time t is denoted by C receiver , t . Q total is the total amount of drug in the system, V receiver is the volume of the receiver, and V donor is the volume of the donor. C receiver , t − 1 is the receiver concentration at the previous time point, and ∆t is time interval. The sample replacement factor, f = 1 − V sample / V receiver . In each experiment, the mass balance was determined and a total recovery of greater than 95% of the drug put into the system was recovered in all cases, suggesting cell uptake was not appreciable. $$ {C}_{\mathrm{receiver}},t=\frac{Q_{\mathrm{total}}}{V_{\mathrm{receiver}}+{V}_{\mathrm{donor}}}+\left[\left({C}_{\mathrm{receiver}},t-1\times f\right)-\frac{Q_{\mathrm{total}}}{V_{\mathrm{receiver}}+{V}_{\mathrm{donor}}}\right]\times {e}^{-{P}_{\mathrm{app}}\times A\times \left(\frac{1}{V_{\mathrm{receiver}}}+\frac{1}{V_{\mathrm{donor}}}\right)\times \Delta t} $$ (3)
Permeability is a rate-based measurement that needs to be expanded to determine the effects of the Sol app enhancement provided by the formulation within the apical compartment, which represents the intestinal lumen in a simplified in vitro model. Therefore, to approximate formulation effects on drug absorption, flux needs to be described as the amount of drug transported across the Caco-2 cell barrier over a unit area and time. The values for flux ( J ) can be calculated for the transport of drug from the apical to basolateral compartment by multiplying the initial concentration and permeability coefficient (Eq. 4 ). $$ \mathrm{Flux}=\frac{\mathrm{d}M/\mathrm{d}t}{A}={C}_0\bullet {P}_{\mathrm{app}} $$ (4)
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was conducted using one-way ANOVA for all pairwise comparison of C 0 , P app , and flux values between two different formulations of the same drug compound with Scheffe’s method testing on SAS (Cary, NC). A p value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS
Niclosamide, celecoxib, and resveratrol are moderately hydrophobic with high melting points. These compounds can form hydrogen bond complexes, thus having fairly high tendencies to nucleate and recrystallize in solution. Beside its antiparasitic activity, niclosamide has also been shown to exhibit antiviral and anticancer effects according to recent investigations ( , ). Celecoxib is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that selectively inhibits cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) enzyme and prevents the conversion of arachidonic acid into prostaglandin proinflammatory precursors ( ). Resveratrol is naturally produced in grapes and well-known for its cardioprotective and anticancer attributes ( ). The solubility advantage of amorphous formulations is associated with the lack of long-range order in their solid-state properties. In general, an amorphous system has a higher free energy level in relation to the crystalline form providing it with a tendency to nucleate and then recrystallize in order to reach a thermodynamically more stable state ( ). Polymeric excipients can be added as a matrix to inhibit crystallization via interactions formed between highly dispersed drug molecules and the polymer ( , ).
PXRD Characterization and Physical Stability of Amorphous Dispersions
In this study, three commercially available polymers, namely HPMCAS, PVPVA, and Soluplus®, were used as polymeric matrices to contrast with the novel DLB polymers to develop amorphous dispersions of the model compounds. For each compound, two of the commercially available polymers were used along with a novel DLB polymer where the chemistry was modified to enhance the carrying capacity for each specific drug (proprietary information of Phytoption, LLC.) The crystallinity of the formulations was assessed using PXRD. This technique was also used to detect crystallization occurring in the ASD formulations during storage of the respective formulations for 2 and 4 weeks at 40°C/75% RH. Figure 1 shows the PXRD of pure unprocessed active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) and ASDs containing different excipients. The diffraction pattern of drug-polymer dispersions exhibited an “amorphous halo” in place of Bragg peaks suggesting that they were “X-ray” amorphous. The absence of crystalline peaks strongly supports the formation of ASD for niclosamide, celecoxib, and resveratrol. Fig. 1 PXRD patterns scanned from 5° to 40° 2 θ at a speed of 2° per minute for pure crystalline drug and polymeric amorphous dispersions for a niclosamide, b celecoxib, and c resveratrol formulated with four different polymeric excipients
In order to investigate the inhibitory effects of the polymeric excipients on crystallization, two sets of samples were taken from each formulation at 2 and 4 weeks after being subjected to the storage treatments (40°C/75% RH). Peaks indicating crystallization were observed for niclosamide ASD formulated with DLB1 and HMPCAS after 2 weeks, while the sample remained in amorphous state for up to 4 weeks in the formulations containing PVPVA and Soluplus® (Fig. 2 a, b). For celecoxib formulations, a relatively low level of crystallization was observed in the dispersion containing DLB2 at 2 weeks with no further change in the diffractogram at 4 weeks posttreatment (Fig. 2 c, d). Other excipients ( i.e. , HPMCAS, PVPVA, and Soluplus®) did not lead to crystallization of celecoxib within the 4-week period. The PXRD diffractogram of the resveratrol-DLB3 dispersion revealed that crystallization took place within 2 weeks of storage at 40°C/75% RH, similar to the formulation containing HPMCAS (Fig. 2 e). While the spectrum of resveratrol-PVPVA dispersion remained largely as an “amorphous halo” at week 2, there were stronger Bragg peaks present at week 4, indicating that some crystallization may be occurring (Fig. 2 f). Table I summarizes the presence of crystallization at different time points as detected by PXRD for all the formulations tested. Interestingly, crystalline-indicating peaks were not observed over the 4-week storage time in all the formulations using Soluplus®. PVPVA was effective as a crystalline inhibitor for the ASD of niclosamide and celecoxib, but peaks of crystallinity were detected at 4 weeks for resveratrol formulation. The celecoxib-HMPCAS dispersion remained physically stable for 4 weeks. The DLB compounds failed to inhibit residual crystallization for niclosamide, celecoxib, and resveratrol with the Bragg peaks appearing at less than 2 weeks after storage treatment at 40°C/75% RH. Fig. 2 Effects of polymeric excipients (bottom to top: DLBs, HPMCAS, PVPVA, and Soluplus®) on the physical stability of niclosamide ( a , b ), celecoxib ( c , d ), and resveratrol ( e , f ) ASD formulations after 2 and 4 weeks of storage treatment at 40°C/75% RH Table I Summary on the Presence of Crystallinity Peaks (Indicated by x) Detected Using PXRD After 2 and 4 Weeks of Storage Treatments at 40°C/75% RH APIs Time (weeks) Excipient DLBs HPMCAS PVPVA Soluplus® Niclosamide 2 x x – – 4 – – Celecoxib 2 x – – – 4 – – – Resveratrol 2 x x – – 4 x – APIs active pharmaceutical ingredients, DLBs dendrimer-like biopolymers, HPMCAS hydroxypropyl methylcellulose acetate succinate, PVPVA polyvinylpyrrolidone-co-vinylacetate
MTT Assay for DLB Derivatives
MTT assay was used to assess the potential toxicity of DLB compounds on Caco-2 cell monolayers. In living cells, MTT is oxidized by mitochondrial dehydrogenase into formazan, which is dark blue in color ( ). Therefore, the amount of formazan produced is proportional to the mitochondrial lysis and generally accepted as a measurement of cell survival. A range of concentrations up to 2000 mg/mL was used, with an arbitrary toxic limit was assigned at 80% viability compared to unexposed cells. Only DLB1 and DLB2 at 2000 mg/mL were considered toxic according to the assigned toxicity limit. It should be noted that the sample concentration used to assess mitochondrial-related toxicity of MTT assay was 3 times higher than the level used in the preparation of ASD samples for the Caco-2 permeability studies. These results suggest that phytoglycogen and its derivative including DLB1, DLB2, and DLB3 developed for ASD formulations for niclosamide, celecoxib, and resveratrol have little to no effect on cellular viability of Caco-2 cells in the permeability studies conducted (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 The effects of DLB1, DLB2, and DLB3 on mitochondrial-based toxicity of Caco-2 cells. The limit of < 80% of cell viability comparative to the control cells was utilized as an index for a cytotoxic effect
Changes in the Apparent Permeability Coefficient with Different Polymeric Excipients
In ASD formulations, the amorphous drug is molecularly dispersed within a polymeric matrix to lower the chemical potential and induce the drug-polymer interaction. The presence of the polymer can lead to disruption of solid-state long-range crystallization interaction and delay the conversion from amorphous to crystalline form in an aqueous environment ( ). Although the conversion from amorphous to crystalline form is inevitable, the main goal is to sufficiently maintain supersaturation in the GI tract so that a safe and efficacious therapeutic drug level can be achieved ( , ). Crystallization is a two-step process starting with nucleation and followed by crystal growth to form solid precipitates. Once supersaturation can no longer be maintained, the concentration of the drug in the solution becomes equivalent to the solubility of the thermodynamically more stable crystalline form ( ). If the permeation rate across the epithelial barrier is sufficiently high, then the supersaturation state will be altered due to the resultant loss of free drug through absorption. Alternatively, if crystallization takes place immediately upon contact with water, the solubility advantage associated with the amorphous state is lost. Polymeric excipients can act as crystallization inhibitors during dissolution to prolong supersaturation and potentially enable higher absorption, except for permeability-limited compounds ( ). To better understand the consequences of ASD on drug absorption, the effects of the formulation on both Sol app and P app of the drug should be considered ( ).
To assess the balance between the ASDs and potential absorption enhancement, the permeability and flux of each ASD formulation across Caco-2 cells were determined. The Caco-2 cell line was derived from a human colorectal adenocarcinoma and is a widely used model for permeability screening in the academia and industry ( , ). The Caco-2 cells have long been utilized as an in vitro model of the small intestine, where it is speculated that a majority of drug absorption takes place after oral administration ( ). In this study, the cells were cultured on a Transwell® filter insert forming a monolayer and dividing the chamber into the apical and basolateral compartments. Initially, the sample was added to the apical side (donor), and the amount of drug transported across the cell barrier into the basolateral compartment was analyzed at 6 time points over a 3-h period. The ASD samples were prepared by adding 1 g of the amorphous blend per mL of HBSS, followed by mixing and centrifugation to remove solid precipitates. The supernatants were collected and used in the permeability studies and to determine C 0 via HPLC analysis and a standard curve of known concentrations. The apparent permeability coefficient, P app , values calculated using the sink-corrected equation and the general equation were similar for most samples (see Table II ). The receiver concentrations of samples containing celecoxib and resveratrol in crystalline form without any excipient were found to be at 18 and 10% of the donor concentration at the final time point of 180 min, respectively. The P app calculated using the general equation was 11.6 × 10 −6 cm/s for celecoxib and 25.4 × 10 −6 cm/s for resveratrol, which were both higher than the values obtained from the equation assuming sink condition. Table III shows the C 0 , P app , and flux of all the formulations for niclosamide, celecoxib, and resveratrol. Table II The Apparent Permeability Coefficients Calculated Using the Sink-Corrected Eq. 1 ( P app , 1) and the General Eq. 2 ( P app , 2) Drug Excipient C receiver / C donor (%) P app , 1 P app , 2 Niclosamide None – ND ND DLB < 10 0.23 ± 0.01 0.24 ± 0.01 HPMCAS < 10 4.31 ± 0.23 5.71 ± 0.30 PVPVA < 10 1.48 ± 0.04 1.58 ± 0.06 Celecoxib None 18 4.22 ± 0.01 11.6 ± 0.26 DLB < 10 1.78 ± 0.01 1.05 ± 0.02 HPMCAS < 10 4.82 ± 0.29 4.55 ± 0.12 PVPVA 12 4.03 ± 0.10 5.17 ± 0.22 Resveratrol None 10 10.5 ± 0.01 25.4 ± 0.89 DLB < 10 5.33 ± 0.46 4.81 ± 0.28 HPMCAS < 10 5.99 ± 0.14 10.2 ± 0.28 Soluplus® 10 11.9 ± 0.60 13.3 ± 2.53 P app (10 −6 cm/s) ND not detectable, DLB dendrimer-like biopolymer, HPMCAS hydroxypropyl methylcellulose acetate succinate, PVPVA polyvinylpyrrolidone-co-vinylacetate Table III Flux Values Were Calculated as a Product of Initial Drug Concentration Times Apparent Permeability Coefficient Obtained From the Studies Using Caco-2 Monolayers APIs Time Excipient None DLBs HPMCAS PVPVA Soluplus® Niclosamide C 0 1.01 ± 0.02 204 ± 2.14 20.8 ± 0.24 141 ± 1.07 – P app ND 0.24 ± 0.01 5.71 ± 0.30 1.58 ± 0.06 – Flux ND 4.82 ± 0.13 11.9 ± 0.65 22.3 ± 0.73 – Celecoxib C 0 3.66 ± 0.03 252 ± 6.24 34.6 ± 0.54 22.6 ± 0.53 – P app 11.6 ± 0.26 1.05 ± 0.02 4.55 ± 0.12 5.17 ± 0.22 – Flux 4.26 ± 0.10 26.5 ± 0.13 15.7 ± 0.59 11.7 ± 0.26 – Resveratrol C 0 25.8 ± 0.08 176 ± 7.68 156 ± 23.4 – 6.90 ± 0.08 P app 25.4 ± 0.89 4.81 ± 0.28 10.2 ± 0.28 – 13.3 ± 2.53 Flux 65.3 ± 2.18 84.8 ± 4.32 159 ± 25.8 – 9.17 ± 1.83 C 0 (mg/L); P app (10 −6 cm/s); flux (× 10 −8 mg/cm 2 s) The initial drug concentration increased for all ASD formulations, except resveratrol-Soluplus®, with a concurrent decrease in drug permeability from apical to basolateral compartment. The highest flux values were observed with niclosamide-PVPVA, celecoxib-DLB2, and resveratrol-DLB3, where significant increases in initial drug concentration compensate for the reduction in permeability coefficients. The values for initial concentration, P app , and flux are reported as mean ± standard deviation ( n = 3) ND not detectable, APIs active pharmaceutical ingredients, DLBs dendrimer-like biopolymers, HPMCAS hydroxypropyl methylcellulose acetate succinate, PVPVA polyvinylpyrrolidone-co-vinylacetate
DISCUSSION
A crystalline peak was not observed in the samples containing Soluplus for up to 4 weeks storage at 40°C/75% RH. PVPVA was effective in preventing crystallization for all samples except for resveratrol. The ASD of niclosamide and resveratrol samples contained residual crystallinity detectable by the PXRD after 4 weeks of storage treatment. There were Bragg peaks presented in all DLB samples at 2 weeks of storage treatment. Due to the ability to modify the DLB surface chemistries, the data will be used by Phytoption to generate novel DLB polymers that could enhance physical stability. Other characterization and screening techniques are required to better understand the formation of a single-phase ASD and the potential correlation between drug and polymer leading to these results. However, these studies will be performed in concert after additional DLB surface modifications are made in order to increase the ASD physical stability. In addition, intermolecular interaction between drug and polymeric excipients is proposed to be investigated using UV-vis, FTIR, and Raman microscopy to detect changes in the molecular interactions in amorphous dispersion compared to crystalline drug at later stages. Our primary goal was to investigate the relationship between Sol app and flux.
To investigate the potential effects of phytoglycogen derivatives on cell viability, the conversion of MTT to its insoluble formazan derivative by exposed mitochondrial enzymes in MTT assay was conducted using Caco-2 cells. At concentrations below 2 g/mL, the viability of Caco-2 cells remained above 80% for all DLB samples compared to untreated cells in MTT assay. Incorporation of DLBs to form amorphous dispersion provided the highest flux values for celecoxib compared to other polymeric excipients, while HPMCAS led to the highest flux value for niclosamide and resveratrol. The changes in Sol app and the P app values are discussed in detail in the following sections.
The Highest Initial Drug Concentration and a Concomitant Reduction in the P app Value for Niclosamide-DLB1 Dispersion
Initial concentrations of niclosamide for the ASD formulations containing HPMCAS, PVPVA, and DLB1 were 20.8, 141, and 204 mg/L, respectively. Niclosamide-DLB1 provided the highest degree of supersaturation but resulted in the lowest P app value at 0.24 × 10 −6 cm/s (Fig. 4 a). When PVPVA was used as the polymeric excipient, the P app was 1.58 × 10 −6 cm/s. The highest P app value of 5.71 × 10 −6 cm/s was obtained using niclosamide-HPMCAS which produced the lowest C 0 . The changes in P app may be attributed to the differences in the drug release rates from the polymeric matrix. In this case, the amount of free drug available to permeate through the cell barrier may be dictated by the stability of the dispersion and the interactions between drug molecules and the polymer. It is important to note that all of the experiments for niclosamide samples were performed with sink conditions and < 10% of the donor concentration appeared in the receiver chamber. The mannitol paracellular permeability (data not shown) and MTT assay also demonstrated that the cell integrity and viability were maintained; thus, this phenomenon is indicative of the release kinetics. Further work needs to be conducted to accurately delineate the contributing factors that govern permeability rate changes as a function of time. Fig. 4 Changes in the apparent permeability coefficients and flux values for niclosamide ASD formulations ( a ) containing (1) HPMCAS at 20.8 mg/L, (2) PVPVA, and (3) DLB1 at initial concentration are illustrated. No data was reported for crystalline drug due to low concentration of the drug. The cumulative amount of drug transported from the apical to the basolateral compartment over a 3-h period for niclosamide ASD formulations is revealed in ( b )
The Formation of Stable Drug-Polymer Colloidal Particles and Nanoaggregates and a Reduction in P app
When ASDs are added to an aqueous medium, multiple forms of colloidal particles are generated, including free drug molecules, solvated polymer units, polymer colloids, amorphous drug nanoparticles, and nanoaggregates as illustrated in Fig. 5 ( , ). While solid precipitates can be initially separated via centrifugation, polymer colloids, nanoparticles, and a small amount of nanoaggregates may still be present in the aqueous phase. Absorption only occurs for drug molecules in the solvated form. The colloidal particles undergo a dynamic process to unload the drug and replenish them in the bulk solution. This results in prolonged supersaturation and improved drug absorption. P app can be calculated based on the appearance rate of the drug in the basolateral side. It accounts for all the diffusional barriers present in the system such as unstirred water layers ( P UWL ), collagen-coated filter membrane ( P C-F ), and the cell monolayer ( P m ). $$ \frac{1}{P_{\mathrm{app}}}=\frac{1}{P_{\mathrm{UWL}}}+\frac{1}{P_{\mathrm{C}-\mathrm{F}}}+\frac{1}{P_{\mathrm{m}}} $$ (5) Fig. 5 The illustration depicts the potential dissolution-based species that can be generated from polymeric ASD formulations upon exposure to an aqueous environment in the apical compartment. Free drug molecules can only be transported across the epithelial cell barrier in the solvated form. Other particulate forms can serve as drug reservoirs and replenish the amount of free drug within the bulk solution
When the solubility-enabling formulation is added to the apical compartment, P app can change or remain unchanged based on the free drug concentration. The changes become significant when the release of free drug from the polymeric reservoir is influenced by the erosion of the polymer matrix, creating a phenomenon that is described as carrier-controlled dissolution as shown in Fig. 6 ( ). Amphiphilic polymers consisting of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic components tend to form a core-shell structure upon contact with water ( ). The formation of this structural assembly is rapid due to the thermodynamic stability and the resultant solubility enhancement is associated with the balance between the preferential hydration intrinsic to the properties of the individual macromolecules. The term “preferential hydration” is used to describe the physical phenomenon in which water molecules interact with macromolecules, e.g. , protein surface ( ). Dendrimer and polymeric micelles can form nano- and microstructures in solution and can act as colloidal drug carriers, provided the drug interactions are competitively strong enough in comparison to water ( ). Briefly, dendrimer polymeric micelles have increased drug loading capacity due to the hydrophobic core structure and high dispersion stability based on the presence of the hydrophilic chains. Combined with other factors including hydration level and polymer swelling capability, dendrimers contribute to the solvation and stability of the drug-polymer system in the aqueous environment ( ). If the ASD formulation gives rise to the colloidal particles resembling the core-shell structure, the carrier-controlled dissolution can take place, and the diffusion of drug across the polymeric matrix into the bulk solution can be defined using the Stokes-Einstein (Eq. 5 ). We must note that the use of the Stokes-Einstein equation infers our assumption that assemblies are spherical in nature. The diffusion coefficient is denoted by D . It is proportional to the temperature ( T ) and inversely proportional to the viscosity ( ƞ ) and hydrodynamic radius of the particle ( R ). Here, k is the Boltzmann constant. $$ D=\frac{kT}{6\pi \eta R} $$ (6) Fig. 6 In an aqueous environment, polymeric ASD formulation can undergo (a) carrier-controlled dissolution or (b) drug-controlled dissolution. When the excipient is a water-soluble polymer, the hydration process takes place rapidly resulting in a carrier-controlled dissolution. In this case, the drug molecules are released at the polymer-water surface in their solvated form. For drug-controlled dissolution, the polymeric excipient has low water solubility and the drug molecules are released intact from the matrix
It has been suggested that the polymeric excipient and drug molecules may form molecular interactions that are highly favorable. These interactions lead to the formation of a stable drug-polymer system in water that can influence the drug release mechanism ( ). In the carrier-controlled dissolution process, the release of free drug into apical compartment or intestinal lumen is controlled by the activity or chemical potential of undissolved solute. Under certain circumstances, such as highly exothermic mixing of drug and polymer, thermodynamic driving force becomes negative and the chemical potential of ASD may fall below the crystalline form of the drug ( ). ASD formulations have been proven to be one of the most effective solubility-enabling formulations, but the ultimate success can only be realized when the system has been optimized for (1) amorphization or formation of ASD, (2) storage stability during a pharmaceutically relevant time frame, and (3) solubilization enhancement in an aqueous environment ( ). A well-balanced interaction between drug and polymeric excipient is of crucial importance for successful outcomes of ASD formulations.
Inverse Proportionality Between Initial Drug Concentration and P app Across Caco-2 Cell Monolayers
Flux is defined by the initial concentration multiplied by the permeability coefficient (Eq. 4 ). Solubility-enabling formulations such as ASDs should lead to an increase in flux based on concomitant increases in both initial apparent free concentration and permeability ( ). In contrast, a decrease in the P app was observed for the niclosamide-DLB1 dispersion. A similar pattern in which increase in drug supersaturation was associated with a decrease in apparent permeability coefficient was found in all three drugs tested. For celecoxib-DLB2 and resveratrol-DLB3, the P app of the drug decreased from 11.6 to 1.05 × 10 −6 cm/s ( p < 0.0001) and 25.4 to 4.81 × 10 −6 cm/s ( p < 0.0001), respectively, compared to the sample containing crystalline drugs (Table III ).
The addition of PVPVA provided a 13-fold increase in Sol app of niclosamide. Although the concentration of niclosamide-PVPVA sample was 30% lower ( p < 0.0001) than that of the sample containing DLB1, it exhibited a P app that is approximately 6 times higher ( p < 0.0005). Consequently, the flux value of the sample containing PVPVA was highest. Niclosamide-PVPVA also led to the highest amount of drug transported from apical to the basolateral compartment after 3 h.
A similar pattern was observed for the ASDs of celecoxib (Fig. 7 a). The incorporation of HPMCAS resulted in a slight increase in the Sol app ( p < 0.05) of celecoxib and a similar P app compared to the formulation containing PVPVA; thus, the sample containing HPMCAS resulted in a slightly higher value of flux ( p < 0.0001). The permeability of the drug decreased from 11.6 × 10 −6 to 1.05 × 10 −6 cm/s ( p < 0.0001) when the celecoxib-DLB2 dispersion was added to the donor compartment, but this sample was found to have the highest flux value due to its large magnitude of concentration increase compared to crystalline drug (252 versus 3.66 mg/L, p < 0.0001)). Fig. 7 Changes in apparent permeability coefficient and flux for celecoxib ( a ) and resveratrol ( c ) ASD formulations. The cumulative amount of drug transported from the apical to the basolateral compartment over a 3-h period for pure drug and polymeric dispersions of celecoxib ( b ) and resveratrol ( d )
In the case of resveratrol (Fig. 7 c), both DLB3 and HPMCAS resulted in a large increase in Sol app and up to approximately 80% decrease in P app for resveratrol-DLB3 versus crystalline drug sample. However, the solubilization capacity also resulted in a significant increase in the flux from 65.3 × 10 −8 mg/cm 2 s for the crystalline drug sample without polymer to 159 × 10 −8 mg/cm 2 s ( p < 0.0005) with resveratrol-HPMCAS. Moreover, samples prepared from resveratrol-Soluplus® dispersion had a drug concentration lower than the reported solubility of resveratrol alone in its crystalline form and a lower P app leading to the lowest flux value of 9.17 × 10 −8 mg/cm 2 s.
A Large Increase in Initial Drug Concentration Compensates for the Reduction of P app
The samples prepared from amorphous dispersion using DLB1 resulted in a decrease in the flux of niclosamide across Caco-2 cell monolayers. The fluxes of celecoxib and resveratrol formulated with DLBs were however at the highest values compared to other formulations containing other excipients and drug alone. In these cases, the amorphous dispersion provided a significant increase in the Sol app that enhanced the flux values. Although there were reductions in the values for the P app , the samples containing DLB2 resulted in highest values of flux for celecoxib. The celecoxib-DLB2 dispersion induced a significant increase in the supersaturation level and made up for the reduction in P app . For niclosamide, however, the highest flux was achieved with the addition of PVPVA in the ASD formulation. The flux value for niclosamide-PVPVA was 22.3 × 10 −8 mg/cm 2 s which is 2 times ( p < 0.0001) and 5 times ( p < 0.0001) higher than that of ASD containing HPMCAS and DLB1, respectively. Although DLB1 added to the formulation resulted in the greatest supersaturation level, it was insufficient in compensating for a sharp decrease in permeability coefficient of niclosamide caused by the DLB1-drug-binding interactions leading to reduced free compound solubility. For resveratrol, DLB3 and HPMCAS provided a similar increase in Sol app , but resveratrol-DLB3 has a lower P app , and thus, a flux value that is lower than the resveratrol-HPMCAS ( p < 0.001) and similar to the crystalline drug sample was obtained.
According to a literature assessment consisting of 40 research papers, amorphous dispersions led to improved bioavailability in 82% of the cases ( ). This suggests that ASD can be an effective method for improving the performance of poorly water-soluble drugs. However, a knowledge gap still exists for in vitro and in vivo relationships in this area, which may be the underlying cause for unchanged or decreased bioavailability in other cases. The development and in vitro evaluation of ASD are performed based upon dissolution testing and focus on the increase in solubility and achieving the “spring-and-parachute” effect ( ). While this approach is an essential characteristic of ASD for obtaining prolonged supersaturation, its effect on absorption in an in vivo environment may be precluded due to the presence of other confounding factors ( e.g. , absorptive surface, dynamic exchange of dissolution species, intestinal precipitation, luminal contents, differences in fluid distribution in the intestine, etc. ) ( , , ). Bevernage et al. conducted an experiment using Caco-2 cultured on Transwell® inserts to investigate supersaturation in an absorptive environment ( ). The results showed that the optimal degree of supersaturation based on formulation performance in a nonabsorptive condition did not correlate with the highest transport in an absorptive surface. Thus, the Caco-2 permeability assay may provide additional insight to augment the evaluation of the ASD performance in vitro .
The effects of solubility-permeability interplay on drug transport across a membrane barrier have been associated with solubility-enabling formulation. The trade-off between these two parameters can be observed regardless of the solubility-enhancing mechanism. The magnitude of changes can be attributed to the interaction between the drug and excipient, which is inversely proportional to the availability of the drug within the aqueous environment. A well-balanced interaction is required to achieve a supersaturation and a clinically relevant supersaturation. Additionally, the interaction needs to be maintained over time to avoid the precipitation of the drug in the donor compartment or the intestinal lumen prior to the transport of the drug across the intestinal barrier. Further improvement on DLBs can be made to develop an excipient that can be used for ASD formulation for niclosamide and the other two drugs. Other studies such as DSC, ITC, drug release assays, and biphasic dissolution systems can be conducted to collect additional data that can be used as a guide in the further optimization of DLB excipients. Moreover, the DLB properties enable tailoring of the surface chemistry to better stabilize and control release rates from an ASD formulation.
CONCLUSION
DLBs can be used to prepare ASD formulation for niclosamide, celecoxib, and resveratrol. A low level of crystallization occurred in the celecoxib-DLB2 formulation at 2 weeks (40°C/75% RH) with little to no changes in the PXRD pattern after 4 weeks. However, there was a significant development of Bragg peaks indicating crystallization for DLB1-formulated niclosamide and resveratrol. The permeability studies using Caco-2 cell monolayers showed that there is a reduction in the apparent permeability of the drug formulated as ASD with a polymeric matrix that leads to the increased Sol app , but not free drug in solution. The reduction level may be related to the interaction between the drug molecules and the polymer. A significant decrease in the P app values led to a reduction in flux for nilcosamide-DLB1 compared to the formulation containing PVPVA. The changes in P app may be attributed to the differences in the drug release rates from the polymeric matrix. While the biopolymers were found to be less effective in preventing crystallization of the amorphous materials compared to other commercialized polymers, DLB2 provided the highest increase in flux among all three formulations of celecoxib. Furthermore, the evaluation of the DLB polymers here was to evaluate the potential for an impact on performance, as implicated by flux. Since the DLB polymers can be readily surface modified through functionalization, the next generations of the polymers should focus on reducing nucleation potential, increasing carrying capacity, and providing higher flux values in in vitro screens prior to advancement. Therefore, the evaluation here should serve as a guidance for the further improvement on DLBs to tailor their potential to be used for ASD formulation of niclosamide, celecoxib, and resveratrol. Such an approach should also be encouraged for the development of other compounds using DLB excipients for the development of physically stable and enhanced ASD formation with improved performance in the future. Efforts toward these aims are already under investigation.