INTRODUCTION
Most of the polymers used in film coatings are amorphous ( ). The amorphous polymer does not reach thermodynamic equilibrium when stored under the glass transition temperature ( T g ) ( , ). The polymers do have a tendency to undergo slow transformation towards equilibrium ( , , , ). This spontaneous transition or process for glassy materials is called physical aging or enthalpy relaxation ( , ). The aging is characterized by reduction of free volume ( , , , ), which results in a progressive increase in yield stress, tensile, and flexural modulus ( , ). This could affect the properties of polymeric film with the storage as well ( , , ). Sinko et al. reported the effect of physical aging on the dissolution and mechanical properties of hydroxypropyl methylcellulose phthalate (HPMCP) ( ). Significant reduction in creep compliance was observed. The dissolution rate, governed partly by glass density, was decreased after the physical aging treatment. Erratic releases will be expected with film-coated dosage forms due to the slow physical aging process ( , ). Curing, accelerated thermal aging, was used to address this issue ( , , ).
When aqueous dispersion-based polymeric films are stored at temperatures above their T g , polymer chains diffuse to adjacent particles and polymer particles undergo coalescence. This process is called gradual coalescence or curing ( , , ). Curing could erase particle identity and form an almost homogeneous film. For organic solvent-based films, curing increases the mobility of polymer chains by heating the film samples. The films can relax to equilibrium at a faster rate. It is similar to annealing. Curing is used to provide a film which is stable over time ( ). It is dependent on various factors, such as polymer properties ( ), type and concentration of plasticizer ( ), and storage temperatures ( ).
Here, the curing and casting methods on the physicochemical properties of polymeric-free films were studied using Kollicoat® SR30D and Kollicoat® MAE100PE. SR30D is an aqueous dispersion of poly(vinyl acetate) (Fig. 1 a) and has a 30% ( w / w ) solid content. MAE100P is a white dispersible powder composed of 97% ( w / w ) poly(methacrylic acid-ethylacrylate) (Fig. 1 b), 0.7% ( w / w ) sodium lauryl sulfate, and 2.3% ( w / w ) polysorbate 80. The ratio of methacrylic acid/ethylacrylate in the copolymer is 1:1. Fig. 1 The structures of a poly(vinyl acetate), b poly(methacrylic acid-ethylacrylate), and c TEC
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
All the materials were obtained from commercial sources. Both SR30D and MAE100P polymers were kindly donated by the BASF Inc. (Florham Park, NJ). The plasticizer used for preparing the polymer films was triethyl citrate (TEC), which was purchased from Morflex Inc. (Greensboro, NC).
Preparation of Free Films from Polymer Aqueous Dispersions or Organic Solutions
To prepare aqueous dispersion-based films, SR30D (50 g) dispersion or MAE100P (15 g) powder was added to a glass beaker. Enough water was added to increase the total weight equal to 100 g, which led to a colloidal dispersion with a concentration of 15% w / w of the dry solid. TEC, 1.5 or 3.75 g, was added to the SR30D dispersion or MAE100P dispersion, respectively. The above-mentioned dispersion was then mixed by stirring for at least 8 h to ensure enough plasticizing before casting onto a Teflon plate. The contents of each Teflon plate were allowed to dry under ambient temperature for two days to form a film. Once the films were formed, they were removed from the Teflon plates and cut into the required shape for further testing.
To prepare an organic solvent-based SR30D film, 116.6 g of acetonitrile was added into 50 g of SR30D dispersion during stirring to dissolve the polymer. TEC (1.5 g) was then added into the above-mentioned solution. To prepare an organic MAE100P solution, 15 g of MAE100P was slowly added into a glass beaker containing 3.75 g TEC and 81.25 g ethanol (USP grade) during stirring. The mixture was then stirred for at least 2 h before casting onto a Teflon plate. The content in the plate was dried for 2 days for film formation and then moved to a vacuum desiccator (evacuated to around 10 mmHg) for 3 days to remove the organic solvent. All film samples were cured in an oven at different temperatures (40, 60, and 80°C) for various time periods. The physicochemical properties of polymeric-free films, such as water diffusivities and mechanical properties, were measured as a function of curing and preparation methods.
Determination of the Diffusion Coefficient of Water
Water vapor sorption studies were performed using a previously reported method with slight modification ( ). The long-time Fourier model for diffusion into a planar sheet under non-steady-state conditions was used to calculate diffusion coefficients. The following equation was detailed in the literature ( ) and was used to calculate diffusion coefficient:
$$ \ln \left(1-\frac{M_{\mathrm{t}}}{M_{\mathrm{eq}}}\right)=\mathit{\ln}\frac{8}{\uppi^2}-\frac{D{\uppi}^2t}{h^2} $$ (1) M t , the total amount of permeant that has diffused into the polymer strip at time t ; M eq , the total amount of permeant that diffuses into the polymer upon reaching equilibrium or at infinite time; D , the diffusion coefficient for the permeant in the polymer in square centimeters per second; t , time in seconds; h , the thickness of the film in centimeters.
All of the cured and uncured SR30D or MAE100P films were studied using a symmetrical vapor sorption analyzer (SGA-100, VTI Corp., Hialeah, FL). A film of about 30 to 50 mg was placed on the microbalance of the sorption chamber. Before each sorption study, the sample was dried at 25°C for a maximum drying time of 180 min or until it reached a 0.01% weight change over a time period of at least 5 min. Then, the humidity of the sorption chamber was increased to 10% relative humidity and 37°C. After equilibrium was reached, the sorption studies were performed at 37°C and at a relative humidity of 30%. The sorption data were used to calculate the water diffusivities in the free films. A minimum of three film samples were used to calculate the average value for the diffusion coefficient.
Measurement of Mechanical Properties
Mechanical properties of the films were determined using an LF Plus Universal Test Instrument (AMETEK, Inc., Hampshire, UK) with a computer-integrated data acquisition system. Films were affixed to the bottom of the moving crosshead and to stationary platform. The SR30D film is very plastic, with an elongation of 250 to 400% (of the original length) at the breaking point. A higher strain rate was used in order to complete the experiment in a reasonable amount of time. MAE100P films are quite brittle, and their elongations are only 9% of the original length. To get accurate data for such a small elongation, a much lower strain rate was used. Therefore, the crosshead was raised at a speed of 10 mm/min for SR30D films but 2 mm/min for MAE100P films. The force used to break the film was noted and analyzed by a computer. The tensile strength (stress at failure) was calculated as the maximum load divided by the cross-sectional area of the film before failure (tensile strength = force/area = N/m 2 ). The elongation ratio (strain at failure) was calculated as the change in length at the time of sample failure divided by the original length, with the quotient multiplied by 100. At least five parallel measurements were conducted.
Determination of Plasticizer Loss upon Curing
To measure TEC content in a film, about 0.09 g of SR30D film was accurately weighed and placed in 6 ml of acetonitrile to dissolve the film. The polymer was then precipitated by the addition of 7 ml of water, and the mixture was vortexed for 10 s. The polymer precipitate was separated from the water by centrifugation at a speed of 32,400 g (Sorvall RC6+ with SE-12 rotor; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) for 20 min. Clear supernatant (20 μl) was directly injected onto an HPLC C18 column for TEC measurement.
A partition extraction method was used to separate plasticizer from the MAE100P films. Around 0.05 g of a MAE100P film was accurately weighed and then dissolved in 5 ml PBS at pH 7.4 in a glass tube. Methyl-ethyl-ketone (5 ml) was carefully added to the PBS pH 7.4 buffer and then sealed. The sealed tube was transferred to a shaking bath at room temperature. After shaking for 24 h, the vials were allowed to sit for another 4 h, and then, a 100 μl sample from the upper clear solution was taken and diluted with 900 μl of methanol for subsequent HPLC measurement. Samples (20 μl) were filtered through a 0.45 μm filter (Whatman® Polyamide Membranes, 28415333) before injection. The following HPLC method was used in determination of TEC: mobile phase: water, methanol (or acetonitrile) = 1:1 v / v ; flow rate, 1 ml/min; C18 HPLC column (Kromasil, KR300-5-C18), 5 μm, 250 × 4.6 mm. UV absorption was measured at 230 nm.
Water Uptake and Film Weight Loss in Aqueous Solvents
The modified method previously reported ( ) was used to determine the water uptake and film weight loss. The thin polymeric films were first cut into pieces of 1 × 2 (W × L) cm and accurately weighed ( W 0 ) before they were transferred into scintillation vials filled with 15 ml of PBS 7.4 buffer or 0.1 M HCl. The vials were then horizontally shaken at a temperature of 37°C. The film sample was withdrawn from the vial at preset time intervals. The wet film was accurately weighed ( W w ) after the moisture on the film surface was gently wiped off with tissue paper. The wet film was dried to a constant weight at 40°C before measurement of weight again ( W D ). The percent water uptake by the films ( f u ) and the percent weight loss of the films ( f l ) were calculated using the following equations: $$ {f}_{\mathrm{u}}=\frac{W_{\mathrm{w}}-{W}_{\mathrm{D}}}{W_{\mathrm{D}}}\times 100\%;\kern0.5em {f}_{\mathrm{l}}=\frac{W_0-{W}_{\mathrm{D}}}{W_0}\times 100\% $$ (2)
Measurement of Surface Properties of Film
The solid–liquid contact angles of a probe liquid on the “air-side” of SR30D or MAE100P films were examined to evaluate the films’ wetting properties. A Ramé-Hart contact-angle goniometer (Ramé-Hart, NJ) was used to measure the contact angles of a 4 μl liquid drop. The SR30D films were tested with water, while the MAE100P films were tested with 0.1 N HCl. At least five replicate tests were conducted.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Measurement of Diffusion Coefficient
By using sorption studies (VTI) at 30% relative humidity, the diffusion coefficients of water in SR30D and MAE100P free films were measured as a function of curing time and temperature. As shown in Fig. 2 a, the diffusion coefficient of water in water-based SR30D films decreased until a minimum value was reached at 4 h of curing at a temperature of 60°C. The diffusion coefficient of water in the organic solvent-based SR30D films decreased with time until 12 h at a curing temperature of 60°C. When the SR30D films were cured for 4 h, an increase in curing temperature from 40 to 80°C decreased the water diffusivities for both aqueous dispersion-based and organic solvent-based SR30D films (Fig. 2 b). For the aqueous dispersion-based film, longer curing times at a particular curing temperature or a higher temperature at a particular time causes greater polymer particle coalescence and resulted in denser films, which produced lower water vapor diffusion coefficients. As far as the organic solution-based SR30D films were concerned, an increase in curing time provided a greater chance for polymer chains to relax to their equilibrium state from the higher-energy state. An increase in temperature accelerated the movement of the polymer chains. The relaxation rate of polymer chains was correspondingly increased, and the film quickly relaxed to an equilibrium state. Fig. 2 The diffusion coefficients of water in SR30D films vs. curing time at a temperature of 60°C ( a ) and vs. curing temperature at 4 h ( b )
At the same time, it was observed that the water diffusivities in aqueous dispersion-based SR30D films were always higher than those in organic solution-based films. This is related to the difference in film-formation mechanism. For the solution-based films, the polymer was completely dissolved in the organic solution before casting. The degree of entanglement of polymer chains is expected to be high due to the high mobility of polymer chains in solution. However, for aqueous dispersion-based films, the diffusion of polymer chains into neighboring particles is limited to the polymers directly on the surfaces of the particles and the degree of polymer–polymer chain interactions will be much less ( ). Films formed from organic solutions are much denser than the ones from aqueous dispersions. This resulted in higher water mobility in the aqueous dispersion-based films.
One of the objectives of these studies was to compare the physical characteristics of films formed from a latex dispersion with films formed from a true solution. In order to accomplish the objective, it was necessary to use the same polymer for both films and it was necessary to have a true solution. Attempts were made to dissolve the SR30D polymer in ethanol or isopropanol, and several other class 3 solvents were also screened. However, a true solution was not achieved with any of those solvents. In support of that statement, the BASF technical flyer for SR30D reports that mixing the product with ethanol or isopropanol in a 1:5 ratio produces a slightly turbid and viscous solution. A solution in acetone is more turbid. Acetonitrile produced best SR30D solution, which is the reason that it was employed in these studies. It should not be inferred that acetonitrile is being recommended for use in a coating solution for a commercial product.
Figure 3 shows the effect of curing time and curing temperature on the diffusion coefficients of water in the MAE100P films. The results resemble those of the SR30D films with respect to the effect of curing and film formation. At a curing temperature of 60°C, water diffusivities in both aqueous dispersion-based and organic solvent-based MAE100P films decreased with time until a minimum value was reached at 4 h. This is because the 4 h curing time promoted particle coalescence for the pseudolatex films and increased relaxation for the solution-based films. An increase in curing temperatures from 40 to 80°C decreased water diffusivities in both films. Higher temperatures enhanced the mobility of the polymer chains in the film. The degree of particle coalescence will be greater at higher temperatures compared to curing at a lower temperature. The water mobility in organic solution-based MAE100P films is generally lower than that in pseudolatex-based films for a similar reason as the SR30D film; the organic solvent-based film has a denser structure than the aqueous dispersion-based film. Fig. 3 The diffusion coefficients of water in MAE100P films vs. curing time at a temperature of 60°C ( a ) and vs. curing temperature at 4 h ( b )
Mechanical Properties of the Free Films
For the SR30D films cast from aqueous dispersion, the increase in tensile strength and the decrease in percent elongation reached their final values at 4 h of curing at a curing temperature of 60°C (Fig. 4 ). The organic solvent-based SR30D films reach their final values at 12 h at a temperature of 60°C. At 4 h, an increase in curing temperature from 40 to 80°C increased the tensile strength and decreased the elongation percentage of both aqueous dispersion-based and solution-based SR30D films. Curing refers to the treatment of films at elevated temperature for a period of time. The curing treatment will have three concurrent effects: (a) promotion of coalescence, or fusion, of the polymer particles in the films formed from the latex dispersions, or relaxation of the films formed from true solutions. The coalescence or relaxation will resulted in stronger and tougher films ( , , ). (b) Evaporation of any residual solvent, which can increase the tensile strength of the film. (c) Potential loss of volatile plasticizers, which can increase the tensile strength of the film. While the exact level of residual solvent was not measured, the authors were careful to minimize residual solvent. Residual solvent can plasticize the film and, therefore, complicate the comparisons between films formed from a latex dispersion and films formed from a true solution. Fig. 4 Tensile strength ( a ) and percent elongation ( b ) vs. curing time at a temperature of 60°C, and tensile strength ( c ) and percent elongation ( d ) vs. curing temperature at 4 h for SR30D films
Figure 5 illustrates the influence of curing time and curing temperature on the mechanical properties of aqueous dispersion-based and organic solvent-based MAE100P films. Both categories of MAE100P films had an increased tensile strength that almost reached its highest value within 4 h when cured at 60°C. At the same time, the percentage elongation of the water-based films increased over 12 h of curing while it continuously decreased over 4 h of curing in the case of the organic solvent-based films. Interestingly, the tensile strengths of the aqueous dispersion-based MAE100P films are significantly greater than the tensile strengths of organic solvent-based films for all curing times. This cannot be explained by general theories of film formation. A possible reason could be that MAE100P microspheres have a core-shell structure that is preserved in the aqueous solvent-based films ( ). The effect of curing temperature on MAE100P films is illustrated in Fig. 5 a,b. Obviously, a higher temperature resulted in higher tensile strengths for the films regardless of preparation method. The percentage elongation for organic solvent-based MAE100P films decreased, but the percentage elongation for aqueous dispersion-based films was increased when curing temperature increased. Fig. 5 Tensile strength ( a ) and percent elongation ( b ) vs. curing time at a temperature of 60°C, and tensile strength ( c ) and percent elongation ( d ) vs. curing temperature at 4 h for MAE100P films
Once again, the objective of these studies was to compare the physical characteristics of films formed from a latex dispersion with films of the same polymer formed from a true solution. In order to accomplish the objective, it was necessary to use the same polymer for both films and it was necessary to have a true solution. There was never any recommendation or insinuation that acetonitrile be used in coating solutions for commercial products.
Water Uptake and Film Weight Loss
The kinetics of water uptake and weight loss by the SR30D films exposed to PBS pH 7.4 buffer at 37°C are shown in Fig. 6 . Obviously, the rate at which water diffused into the polymeric systems is dependent on the casting method. It is observed that the water uptake by aqueous dispersion-based films is significantly faster than that of the organic solvent-based films. The aqueous solvent-based SR30D film has 29.5% ( w / w ) water uptake, while the organic solvent-based film has only 16.1% ( w / w ) water uptake within 15 min. The water uptake of the aqueous solvent-based SR30D film reaches an equilibrium value of about 50% ( w / w ) within 2 h. In comparison, the percent water uptake (52%) of the organic solvent-based SR30D film is close to equilibrium uptake after 8 h. The different kinetics of water uptake could be explained by the different film structures between the aqueous dispersion-based films and the organic solvent-based films ( ). For the films cast from organic solvent, the polymer molecules were dissolved in the solvent and could move freely before deposition on the surface of the substrate. With the evaporation of solvent, polymer chains move close to each other and finally form a film with a high degree of polymer–polymer interpenetration. As a result, the film formed from organic solution is dense. In the case of aqueous dispersion-based films, the polymer exists as microparticles dispersed in the aqueous phase before it settles on the surface of the substrate. Due to the limited mobilities of the polymer chains within a particle, only a small portion of polymeric chains (those in the region close to the surface of a microparticle) will interdiffuse to the neighboring particle. That means that only a small fraction of the polymeric macromolecules are involved in mutual interaction by crosslinking or entanglement. This results in a much lower degree of polymer interpenetration than in the case of films prepared from organic solutions ( , ). The different degrees of entanglement of SR30D polymer chains determined the kinetics of water uptake. Due to a lower degree of entanglement of the polymer chains, the aqueous solvent-based SR30D films are much less able to inhibit water uptake compared to organic solvent-based films. Fig. 6 Water uptake ( a ) and weight loss ( b ) by SR30D films as a function of time
Figure 6 b shows the profiles of dry-mass loss from SR30D wet films as a function of incubation time at a temperature 37°C. Both aqueous dispersion-based and organic solvent-based SR30D films increasingly lost weight with an increase in incubation time. The weight loss could be attributed to the leaching of TEC, poly(vinyl pyrrolidone), and sodium lauryl sulfate from the films. Within the first hour of incubation, aqueous dispersion-based SR30D had a quick mass loss and 6.7% ( w / w ) of film mass went into the solution. After 1 h, the rate of film weight loss was much slower. Even though organic solvent-based SR30D films have similar curves, the rates and extents of weight loss were significantly smaller. This correlated well with the fact that the water uptake by organic solvent-based SR30D films was much less than that of the aqueous solvent-based films. The aqueous dispersion-based film imbibes water faster than the organic solvent-based films. Water-based films create more water channels for the soluble components to leave as compared to the organic solvent-based films.
The kinetics of water uptake and mass loss for the aqueous dispersion-based and organic solvent-based MAE100P films incubated in 0.1 M HCl at 37°C are shown in Fig. 7 . The water uptake in both types of MAE100P films increased with time. Interestingly, the ultimate water uptake and weight loss of the aqueous dispersion-based MAE100P films were significantly less than those of the organic solvent-based films. This result is contradictory to what was observed for SR30D films. The phenomenon could be a consequence of the core-shell structure occurring in the aqueous dispersion-based MAE100P films ( ). As mentioned earlier, aqueous dispersion-based MAE100P films had better mechanical properties than organic solvent-based films. When the aqueous solvent-based film was incubated in solution, the water uptake and swelling of the film were more effectively hindered in aqueous dispersion-based MAE100P films than in organic solvent-based films. It is easier for water to enter into the interior of the organic solution-based films. As a result, organic solvent-based MAE100P film lost weight at a faster rate than did the aqueous dispersion-based film. The results here agreed well with reports by Thoma ( ) who characterized several enteric coatings prepared from either organic solution or aqueous dispersion. With the exception of Eudragit® L100-55 and Eudragit® L30D-55, higher amounts of coating material were needed to achieve gastro-resistance with aqueous coating than with organic coating ( ). Fig. 7 Water uptake ( a ) and weight loss ( b ) by MAE100P films as a function of time
Plasticizer Loss
The addition of plasticizer can improve the flexibility of film by breaking polymer–polymer interaction including van der Waals, hydrogen bonding, or ionic force ( ). TEC and triacetin with medium lipophilic properties achieve the highest degree of plasticization effect in SR30D films ( ). SR30D is a hydrophobic polymer (Fig. 1 a). The interaction between SR30D and TEC should be relatively weak van der Waals force. However, carbonyl oxygen of TEC forms hydrogen bonding with carboxyl hydrogens of poly(methacrylic acid-ethylacrylate) and break up the polymer–polymer interactions ( ).
The frequently used plasticizer TEC shows a certain degree of volatility during aqueous coating ( ) or during the curing and aging of films ( , , ). The loss of plasticizer can result in the formation of molecular-scale channels within the films. Such a change increases film permeability and/or alters the mechanical properties of films ( ). For a coated solid formulation, plasticizer loss due to curing can lead to increased drug release ( ). Figure 8 illustrates the relationship between plasticizer loss from aqueous dispersion-based or organic solvent-based SR30D films versus curing time or curing temperature, respectively. The concentration of TEC in uncured film samples was considered to be 100% of the desired level of plasticizer. The percentage of plasticizer remaining was calculated for each cured sample. The curing resulted in evaporation of the plasticizer and 97.4 and 93.5% of plasticizer remained in the water-based SR30D film after 4 and 16 h of curing, respectively, at 60°C. In the case of organic solvent-based films, 96.2 and 87.9% of plasticizer was retained after 4 and 16 h of curing, respectively, at 60°C (Fig. 8 a). Curing at 40°C seems to have no effect on the evaporation of plasticizer for either of the films (Fig. 8 b). For the aqueous dispersion-based films, about 3% of plasticizer is lost when the curing temperature increased to 60°C for 4 h. However, almost no plasticizer loss happened at a curing temperature of 80°C for 4 h. This could be due to the film rapidly curing at high temperature. The originally discrete polymer microparticles fused together in a short time and closed the pores. The disappearance of pores in the film prevents evaporation of the plasticizer. In the case of organic solvent-based films, TEC was homogenously mixed with the polymers. Results showed that an increase in curing temperature improved the mobility of TEC molecules and they had a greater evaporation rate than was seen for the aqueous dispersion-based films. Fig. 8 Plasticizer loss for SR30D films as a function of curing time at 60°C ( a ) and as a function of curing temperature at 4 h ( b )
Curing did not show any real effect on the plasticizer loss from MAE100P films prepared from organic solvent-based or aqueous dispersion-based films (Table I ). This could be due to TEC can interact with MAE100P films by hydrogen bonding ( ). The strong interaction between TEC and MAE100P may have kept the plasticizer from evaporating during the curing treatment. Table I Plasticizer Loss from MAE100P Films After Curing MAE100P film TEC remaining % 60°C, 16 h 80°C, 4 h Aqueous dispersion-based film 96.72 ± 2.56 98.08 ± 3.24 Organic solvent-based film 100.75 ± 1.73 98.18 ± 1.77
.
Contact Angle Measurements
Contact angle is an indicator of the wettability and hydrophilicity of solid surfaces. For a given liquid, the solid–liquid contact angle is dependent on the surface properties of the solid. Both surface roughness and change in solid-surface composition have an effect on the contact angle ( , ). The effect of preparation method on the surface properties was investigated by comparing the contact angles of films prepared from aqueous dispersions or organic solutions ( ). It is interesting to observe that the organic solution-based films have greater contact angles compared to aqueous dispersion-based films. However, the authors propose that this results from the fact that the aqueous dispersion-based films have more hydrophilic components than the organic solvent-based films.
In this study, the SR30D films or MAE100P films cast from organic solution have the identical compositions as the aqueous dispersion-based films. This avoided the possibility of different compositions affecting contact angle, which was previously mentioned ( , ). The effects of casting methods and curing effects on the contact angles of SR30D and MAE100P films are shown in Fig. 9 . The surface of the organic solvent-based SR30D film is apparently more hydrophobic than that of the aqueous dispersion-based film, which is evidenced by the lower contact angles for films cast from aqueous dispersions. In fact, the same was observed for MAE100P films cast from aqueous or organic solvents (Fig. 9 b). The different surface energies between aqueous dispersion-based and organic solvent-based films may be due to the different film-formation mechanisms. It is well-accepted that the polymer microspheres dispersed in water have hydrophilic surfaces. The surfaces of aqueous dispersion-based films are composed of portions of the surfaces of the microspheres that are not involved in coalescence or fusion of particles. Therefore, the surfaces of films prepared from aqueous dispersions are expected to be hydrophilic, too. In the case of organic solvent-based films, the polymer and hydrophilic additives were dissolved in the organic solution. The film surface was presumably a homogeneous mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic components. As a result, the wettability of aqueous dispersion-based films was better than that of organic solvent-based films. The effect of curing treatments on the surface wettability of films is relatively complicated. For the organic solvent-based SR30D or MAE100P films, the curing treatment increased the hydrophobicity of the film, which is indicated by the greater contact angle after curing. The increased contact angle could also be the result of the decreased roughness of the film surface. The organic solvent used in SR30D and MAE100P films is a mixture of acetonitrile and water or ethanol, respectively. These solvents should evaporate more quickly than water, and a little rougher film surface might be expected. The film surface is coarse after the completion of solvent evaporation, and a rougher surface is more readily wetted by the probe liquid. The curing treatment could have smoothed the coarse surface and increased the solid–liquid contact angles of the films. The surface wettability of the aqueous dispersion-based SR30D films did not significantly change after the curing treatment. However, a decrease in contact angle is observed for aqueous dispersion-based MAE100P films after curing. Fig. 9 The effect of curing on the contact angle of water on the surfaces of SR30D films ( a ) and on the contact angle of 0.1 N HCl on the surface of MAE100P films ( b )
CONCLUSION
Curing decreased water diffusion coefficient, increased tensile strength, and induced plasticizer loss by altering the microstructure of the polymer films. The extent of change will be dependent on the curing temperature, time, and film preparation methods. Evaporation of any residual solvent or loss of plasticizer can also increase tensile strength of films. The organic solvent-based SR30D films have better mechanical properties than the corresponding films prepared from aqueous dispersion due to the fact that a high degree of polymer–polymer interpenetration is only present in organic solvent-based films. However, for the MAE100P films, the proposed core-shell structure in the aqueous dispersion-based film resulted in a higher tensile strength, lower rate of swelling than in the case of the organic solvent-based MAE100P films.