INTRODUCTION
Enteric coated solid dosage forms are designed to control the drug release profile so that the drug can be delivered in the small intestine instead of the stomach. Such targeted release in the upper gastrointestinal tract can protect drugs that are susceptible to acidic or enzymatic degradation in the stomach and protect the gastric mucosa from irritating compounds. Enteric coated multi-particulates such as beads were reported to be less influenced by food administration than monolithic dosage forms including enteric coated tablets or capsules, so the pharmacokinetic profiles for the patients are more consistent with enteric coated beads ( ). In addition, the beads present a reduced risk to patient safety when the enteric coating fails for the individual pellets releasing only a fraction of dose, compared to monolithic dosage forms with compromised enteric coatings where the entire dose may be dumped. Hence, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) prefers the development of multi-particulates for enteric coated dosage forms ( ).
Common enteric polymers with pH-dependent solubility profiles include hydroxypropyl methylcellulose acetate succinate, methacrylic acid/ethyl acrylate copolymer (Eudragit® L), polyvinyl acetate phthalate, and cellulose acetate phthalate. Through acidic functional groups, these enteric polymers remain insoluble at low pH, preventing premature release of the drug contained inside the polymer coating, while at neutral pH, the polymers will dissolve to release the drug. The desired performance of delayed release for enteric coated products is highly dependent on the coating quality, including morphology and mechanical strength. A smooth, conformal, and defect-free coating with low brittle fracture tendency is expected to deliver the desired dissolution performance.
However, enteric polymers are often intrinsically brittle ( , ) and, despite the addition of plasticizers, can still exhibit cracks and other defects in the coating under certain manufacturing or storage conditions, which could potentially cause premature drug release, defeating the purpose of enteric coating. The acid-stage dissolution test, in accordance with USP guidance for delayed release dosage forms, is utilized as part of the analytical control strategy to understand and monitor enteric coating performance by assessing integrity in an acidic environment, typically using 0.1 N HCl solution ( ).
The enteric coated product in this study is a drug which is prone to acidic degradation, layered onto the microcrystalline cellulose core pellet, followed by enteric coating of Acryl-Eze® MP containing methacrylate copolymer, via a Wurster coating process for both layers. This product demonstrated adequate enteric resistance after its manufacture and when stored in well-sealed containers, but it showed unexpectedly high dissolution release in the acid-stage testing, after refrigeration storage in a container that was not well sealed. Investigation of this dissolution failure led to findings of surface cracking of enteric coated beads, which prompted further studies to understand the impact of water content and storage temperature on the enteric coating quality and to investigate the mechanism(s) for fracture/deformation observed on the surface of enteric coated beads.
Many analytical techniques, including SEM/energy dispersion spectrometry (SEM/EDS), laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy, NIR, Raman, MRI, and CLSM, have been used to study coating quality and demonstrated potential in providing information on various physicochemical properties ( , , , , , , ). Recently, X-ray CT has been applied to pharmaceutical research to leverage its capability of revealing 3D micro-structures non-destructively, as reviewed by Hancock ( ). X-ray CT was shown to be a useful tool to investigate the influence of primary drying rate on the microscale structure attributes and physicochemical properties of protein containing lyophilized products ( ) and to elucidate the internal physical and chemical microstructure of pharmaceutical granules ( ). In the meantime, the thermal analysis techniques have been widely applied to study the thermal and mechanical properties of enteric coating materials that play significant roles in controlled release ( , ). Gutierrez-Rocca and McGinity demonstrated the correlation between mechanical properties of a thin film of acrylic resin copolymer and its T g ( ). Fadda, Basit, and their coworkers compared the T g measurement of plasticized methacrylic polymer using DSC, DMA, and TDSC showing the same trends in the T g values by three different techniques ( ). Based on these reports, we believe the combination of imaging and thermal analysis can enhance our understanding of structure performance relationship for enteric coatings.
The aim of the present research was to investigate the mechanism(s) and kinetics of enteric coating failure of the beads stored under high-humidity and relevant temperature conditions by deploying complementary techniques involving dissolution test, water activity measurement, imaging (X-ray CT, SEM), and thermal analysis (DMA). The findings are important to the pharmaceutical industry that widely uses enteric coating for controlled release of drugs, where proper control of storage conditions (temperature and humidity) is critical to ensure successful product performance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
A pharmaceutical compound (designated as compound X) was formulated as enteric coated beads. The beads were composed of two layers applied through a modified Wurster coating process onto MCC cores (CelphereTM CP507 from Asahi Kasei). For the drug layer coating, the binder HPMC E 5 was added to deionized water and mixed thoroughly until fully dissolved. Then, the drug, which was milled to 3–8 μm in the mean diameter, was added into the solution with impeller agitation and homogenization until well dispersed. The final concentrations of drug and binder were 16.7 and 3.3% in the aqueous suspension. The drug suspension was sprayed onto MCC pellets to make 36% drug-loading pellets. The second enteric layer was made from a pre-mixed excipient blend, Acryl-Eze® from Colorcon which contained methacrylate copolymer (Eudragit® L 100–55), triethyl citrate, talc, and other ingredients. The Acryl-Eze powder blend was dispersed into deionized water for homogenization to make a 20% aqueous suspension, which was then spray coated onto the drug-coated beads for a weight gain of 15%.
The drug and enteric coating steps used an Aeromatic MP-1 fluidized bed coater, which was equipped with a Wurster column insert (Precision Coater) for the bottom spray pellet coating application. The fluidized bed coater setup included a column gap height of 1 cm and an atomization pressure of 3 bars. For both drug and enteric coating steps, the following process conditions were used: the inlet air temperature was set to be 80–90°C, spray rate was 30–40 g/min, and process air flow was controlled in the range of 55–75 cfm. After completion of the spray process, the pellets were dried at inlet air temperature of 50°C for 5 min, followed by cooling at inlet air temperature of 35°C for 5 min. After the drying/cooling step, the beads were discharged and screened to remove any agglomerates, smaller beads, and spray dried particles that may be present in the batch using 500- and 1200-μm opening size. Enteric coated beads of varying amounts were filled into size 3 HPMC capsules for the strengths of 5 to 50 mg drug using a Bosch GKF encapsulation machine. Characterization studies were conducted with enteric coated beads alone.
Techniques
Dissolution testing was performed in accordance with a USP <711> Method B for a delayed release product. For the acid-stage portion, drug release was assessed in 1000 mL 0.1 N HCl at 37 ± 0.5°C after 2 h. A USP Apparatus I (40-mesh basket) was employed with 100-rpm rotation speed. Samples were analyzed by HPLC with a Chromolith™ RP-18e column, gradient HPLC system, and UV detection at 248 nm. The specification for an acceptable acid-stage result is not more than 10% release after 2 h. Typical release for this product has been 1–2% in 0.1 N HCl after 2 h.
Water activity measurements were performed using a Novasina™ ms1 with enBSK-3 sample sensor. Samples were inserted into the sample cell to fill 2/3 of the total volume and then were equilibrated approximately 30 min prior to taking a reading. Water activity, also known as equilibrium relative humidity, is a measure of free water in the dosage form and enables tracking water uptake of the sample upon exposure to moisture. For these studies, it was utilized to demonstrate water uptake and to correlate moisture level with failure of acidic integrity, observed either through dissolution release above 10% or through images of surface cracks.
SEM
The beads were mounted on a 13-mm aluminum stub with a carbon adhesive tab and sputter coated with 60:40 gold:palladium. The SEM images were collected from FEI Quanta FEG 200F running XT Microscope Control version 2.4. The instrument was operated at low vacuum mode (0.30 Torr), with accelerating voltage at 10 kV. The spot size was 3.0, and the aperture was 40 μm. The large field detector was used for analysis.
X-Ray CT
Skyscan (Kontich, Belgium) 1172 micro-CT scanner equipped with a 10 megapixel X-ray camera was utilized to collect images. The X-ray source was operated at 40 kV and 100 mA. The specimen was rotated through 180 in 0.4° each step. Image pixel size was 4 μm. The frame dimensions were 1048 × 2000 pixels. Reconstruction was performed using NRecon software (Skyscan). The three-dimensional image registration was achieved using the Rigid Registration module in Analyze (Mayo Clinic Rochester MN USA) image processing software.
Loose beads from the long-term stability tests or timed exposure studies were placed inside a polypropylene pipette tip and scanned. In order to closely follow changes in the internal structure of beads over time, some beads were immobilized by being glued to the exterior sections of polypropylene tubing using “Epofix” epoxy adhesive supplied by Struers Inc. (Cleveland, USA). This assembly was placed inside a desiccator containing water and stored in a refrigerator at 5°C and analyzed at multiple time points.
Dynamic Mechanical Analysis
Acryl-Eze films were prepared for DMA analysis in the following way. A sample of 600 mg of Acryl-Eze was suspended in 3 mL of distilled water in a shell vial. To the vial was added 52.8 μL of triethyl citrate. The mixture was transferred to six DMA cloths. Two cloths were lying on each of three glass microscope slides. One slide was stored open in a 60°C forced air oven, another slide was stored open in a 40 °C oven, and the third slide was stored over Drierite™ in a desiccator at ambient room temperature. After drying at 60 and 40°C, those slides were also placed in the room temperature desiccator over DRIERITE until they were used in various experiments.
When dried, the DMA cloth adhered to the microscope slide. A single-edged razor blade was used to remove the DMA cloth from the slide. On the slide remained excess dried Acryl-Eze film. Excess film was completely scraped off the slide producing a light fluffy white solid. This solid was reduced to a powder using the razor blade to cut the large pieces into smaller pieces. This powder was transferred to pre-weighed DSC pans with lids for storage in controlled humidity chambers.
The measurement was completed on a DMA 8000 marketed by Perkin Elmer with single cantilever bending mode. Samples of Acryl-Eze on DMA cloths were removed from each control humidity environment for clamping into the DMA. The width between the clamps was 5.0 mm. Samples were cooled at 3°C/min to starting temperature (typically − 40°C). Samples were then heated at 5°C/min from starting temperature to ending temperature (typically 140°C). A heating rate of 5°C/min was chosen to heat the sample as quickly as possible in the DMA to minimize drying out the polymer.
Stability Studies
Two stability studies were conducted to evaluate the stability of compound X: a bulk storage stability study, evaluating the stability of 15- and 50-mg capsules stored at refrigerated conditions, and an open-dish study to evaluate enteric coated beads and capsules under stressed humidity conditions to confirm the failure mechanism and to gain a better understanding of rates of degradation.
Stability Study 1: Bulk Storage Stability
A bulk simulator stability study was conducted to support the storage and shelf life of unpackaged bulk capsules, stored at 5°C. For the 15- and 50-mg capsules, simulators were prepared containing ten capsules in each polyethylene bag, gooseneck closed and sealed with a cable tie. These samples were stored in chambers set at 5 and 25°C/60% relative humidity and pulled for analysis at initial, 1, 3, 6, and 12 months. In addition, 1 month at 40°C/75% relative humidity was also evaluated. At each time point, samples were pulled and analyzed for physical appearance, dissolution, and water activity.
Stability Study 2: Open-Dish Stability Assessment
As a result of dissolution failure observed in stability study 1, an open-dish study was designed to further assess the failure. Enteric coated beads containing compound X and 15-mg capsules were placed onto petri dishes and equilibrated to the desired humidity. Humidity chambers were utilized to achieve 30 and 40°C/75% relative humidity (RH). For the 5°C condition, a humidity jar was prepared using saturated salt solution and equilibration of the jar to approximately 90% RH was confirmed with a handheld hygrometer prior to introduction of samples. Once confirmed, the jar was placed into a 5°C refrigerator. For the 5°C condition, samples were pulled after 6 h, 1, 2, 3, and 6 days, 2 weeks, and at 1 and 3 months. For the 30 and 40°C conditions, samples were analyzed at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months with the purpose to monitor if this failure was observed at elevated temperatures with longer exposure. At each time point, dissolution, water activity, SEM, and X-ray CT were tested.
RESULTS
Dissolution and Water Activity
Compound X, formulated as enteric coated beads filled into HPMC capsules, was placed on stability. The 15- and 50-mg capsules were packaged in ten-count bulk simulators (gooseneck tied PE bag) and placed on stability at 5°C to mimic stability for bulk, unpackaged capsules. An increase in drug release was observed in the acid-stage dissolution test over the course of the 12-month study, as shown in stability study 1 in Table I . At 12 months, the 15-mg strength capsules failed the dissolution specification test of no more than 10% release. An increase in water activity was also observed indicating water ingress was occurring. Table I Acid Dissolution Performance of 15- and 50-mg Capsules in “Leaky” Packaging in the 5°C Bulk Storage Stability Study Product Condition Time point (months) Dissolution acid release (2 h) Water activity (aW) 15-mg capsule Initial 0 2% 0.36 5°C 3 4% 0.51 6 6% 0.53 12 15% 0.71 50-mg capsule Initial 0 1% 0.33 5°C 3 4% 0.52 6 5% 0.53 12 8% 0.60
To determine the root cause of the undesirable dissolution performance observed above, the stability study 2 was designed to assess the impact of temperature and high humidity on the acid release. The water activity and dissolution results for beads stored at 5 and 25°C/98% RH were compared in Table II . Water activity was utilized to understand when the material would be equilibrated to the storage condition. It was demonstrated that at both conditions, equilibration to the desired humidity was achieved within 1 week and it was maintained throughout the study. While both conditions produced increased drug release, elevated dissolution occurred sooner at refrigerated temperatures. Dissolution release of 5 and 25°C/98% RH data was compared with 30 and 40°C/75% RH samples in Table III to understand if there was an impact at higher temperatures. Both conditions yielded an elevated drug release over time, and 40°C/75% RH samples were much quicker than 30°C/75% RH samples to show a dissolution failure of enteric coated beads. Table II Open-Dish Stability Assessment of Enteric Coated Beads Compared at Refrigerated or Room Temperatures and High Humidity 5°C/98% RH 25°C/98% RH Time point Dissolution acid release (2 h) Water activity Dissolution acid release (2 h) Water activity (aW) 6 h 2% 0.56 2% 0.62 1 day 2% 0.85 1% 0.82 2 days 2% 0.94 NT NT 3 days NT NT 1% 0.90 6 days 4% 0.97 1% 0.93 2 weeks 8%** 0.90 2% NT 1 month NT NT 3% 0.97 3 months NT NT 22% 0.96 NT not tested **The study was stopped because of cracking observed by SEM, even though dissolution did not fail Table III Open-Dish Stability Assessment of 15-mg Capsules Stored at Elevated Temperature/Humidity 15-mg capsules, open dish at 30°C/75% RH 15-mg capsules, open dish at 40°C/75% RH Time period (months) Dissolution acid release (2 h) Water activity (aW) Dissolution acid release (2 h) Water activity (aW) Initial 2% 0.36 2% 0.36 3 2% 0.63 11% 0.58 6 2% NT 45% 0.63 9 3% 0.66 NT NT 12 6% 0.50 NT NT NT not tested
The dissolution results demonstrated that across the range of temperatures investigated (5–40°C), exposure of enteric coated beads or capsules to high humidity such as 98% RH was detrimental to the dissolution performance. To determine the cause(s) of dissolution failure, the enteric coating materials and drug products were characterized by multiple analytical techniques, as discussed in the following sections.
Imaging Analysis
SEM and CT imaging techniques were used to examine the surface and interior structure of the beads respectively. Figure 1 shows severe cracking on the surfaces of beads stored at 5°C/98% RH for 2 weeks, indicating the cause of increased drug release (7.9%). A bead fusion phenomenon was observed for beads stored at 25°C/98% RH for 3 months, as shown in Fig. 2 . The acid release of these fused beads was correspondingly high (21.6%). Figures 3 and 4 showed the SEM images of enteric coated beads stored under 40°C/75% RH for 3 and 6 months. It was obvious the enteric coating layer integrity was compromised at 3 months with the beads glued to each other, which could cause coating damage when the beads were separated, leading to increased acid release (11%) at 3 months. The beads eventually formed an agglomerated mass at 6 months, due to complete fusion of the enteric layers. Fig. 1 SEM images of beads stored at 5°C/98% RH for 2 weeks Fig. 2 SEM images of beads stored at 25°C/98% RH for 3 months Fig. 3 SEM images of beads stored at 40°C/75% RH for 3 months Fig. 4 SEM images of beads stored at 40°C/75% RH for 6 months
X-ray CT images revealed noticeable changes in the internal structure of beads stored under high-humidity conditions. Figure 5 shows the cross-sectional images of beads before any humidity exposure and beads that were stored at 5°C/98% RH for 2 weeks. In the unexposed bead, a distinctive layered structure was evident, consisting of a core, a drug layer, and an enteric coating. The images for the humidity-exposed beads clearly illustrated the structure of the cracks, which not only breached the entire enteric layer on the outer surface, but also extended throughout the drug layer. Fig. 5 Cross-section CT images for control beads not exposed to high humidity (left), and beads stored at 5C/98% RH for 2 weeks (right)
The non-destructive 3D imaging capability of X-ray micro-CT also made it possible to examine the same immobilized beads stored under a condition at multiple time points for a time resolved study. Time sequence images for an enteric coated bead stored at 5°C/98% RH are shown in Fig. 6 . Each image in the time sequence was registered against the previous one to maintain a consistent presentation of the cross-section. This kinetics study allowed us to determine it was at hour 18 that several distinct cracks started to show up in the drug layer. These cracks became wider and more obvious in the ensuing days, and more cracks emerged in the drug layer. Within a short 6-day period of the kinetics study, no cracks were seen to penetrate through the outer enteric layer. Fig. 6 CT images of the same bead stored at 5°C/98% RH for various periods of time
In the CT kinetics study, the diameters of the core MCC beads were measured to determine if there was a change in the size of the core beads. Table IV indicated the core beads expanded slightly after being exposed to moisture, with the mean diameter increasing from 684 to 723 μm within 63 h. This 6% increase in bead diameter corresponds to approximately a 19% increase in volume assuming perfect sphericity of the beads. The most abrupt change of bead size occurred between the 7 and 41 h of exposure. Note that the resolution of CT under the current condition was about 10 μm, so the 40-μm difference in average core diameter indicated a substantial core expansion with moisture intake. This moisture-induced volumetric expansion is due to MCC’s significant hygroscopicity ( ). The core and overall bead expansion was also notable as shown in Fig. 7 , which was a CT image of overlaid pictures of two time points. The red image represented the time zero sample, and the green one represents the same beads after 40-h exposure to 5°C/98% RH conditions. The core expansion was illustrated by the appearance of a green band around the core, and the overall bead expansion was shown by the green band (after exposure) surrounding the red band (time zero). Table IV Microcrystalline Cellulose Core Diameter Measured on Multiples Beads Stored at 5°C/98% RH as a Function of Time Time point 0 3 h 7 h 18 h 41 h 63 h 6 days Mean diameter* (μm) 684.3 684.3 685.2 696.8 719.3 725.1 723.2 Standard deviation (μm) 57.2 54.3 57.6 55.6 58.1 55.9 62.2 Diameter change NA Negligible 0.13% 1.83% 5.11% 5.96% 5.69% Volume change NA Negligible 0.40% 5.60% 16.12% 18.97% 18.05% *The MCC core diameter was measured from a given point on the perimeter of MCC core to cross the center of bead and extended to the other side of core perimeter. Multiple measurements ( n = 24) were taken for four beads along different angles to get the average diameter values. Volume change was calculated based on the assumption of a perfect sphere shape of the core bead Fig. 7 CT images of two time points that are registered and overlaid. Red: prior to exposure. Green: after 41-h exposure to 5°C/98% RH
It was noted the enteric coating layers between the beads were no longer continuous after the beads had been stored at 25°C/98% RH for 3 months, as shown in Fig. 8 . In addition, the contrast between the core and drug layer disappeared, indicating a potential material migration between these two layers or the density changes of the two layers. These CT images were consistent with the SEM data, suggesting that the enteric coating deformed after experiencing the glass transition, leading to the formation of an agglomerated mass of undifferentiated beads eventually. Figure 9 showed the cross-section images obtained from the beads stored at 40°C/75% RH after 3 and 6 months. The 3-month sample showed the evidence of adhesion between enteric coats of adjacent beads. At 6 months, the API and core layers became almost indistinguishable. Many beads fused together and the enteric coating had partially “melted.” Fig. 8 CT images of beads stored at 25°C/98% RH for 3 months Fig. 9 CT images of beads stored 40°C/75% for 3 months (left) and 6 months (right)
Thermal Characterization
The effect of moisture on the T g of the enteric coating film was found to be very pronounced using DMA, as shown in Fig. 10 . The blue curve without symbols showed that “dry” Acryl-Eze softened resulting in a decrease in the storage modulus curve across the entire temperature range. At about 50°C, however, a softening increase was observed. The corresponding tan δ curve (blue curve with symbols) was another way to view the changes occurring in the sample. The tan δ curve like the storage modulus curve also showed a peak maximum at about 90°C with softening starting at a lower temperature around 50°C, indicating the “dry” polymer began to soften and reached maximum softening between 50 and 90°C due to a glass transition. Fig. 10 Modulus change as measured by DMA for dry and wet Acryl-Eze powder mixture. (blue for the dry state, and black for the wet system)
Enteric coating (Acryl-Eze powder mix) exposed to 85% RH at room temperature for a day absorbed about 4% of its initial weight. This wet film showed that its softening profile (solid black curve) occurred at temperatures well below that of the dry film. The tan δ curve for the wet sample (black curve with symbols) showed a very broad peak. This wet sample, heated at 5°C/min without humidity control, was drying out during the analysis. The left end of the curve suggested that the materials softened at a lower temperature in the wet state than in the dry state, while the right end of the curve represented the glass transition of the dry polymer produced in situ .
DISCUSSION
SEM and CT images showed two different coating changes for the enteric coated beads stored under different conditions. When the beads were stored under low-temperature and high-humidity conditions, fracture of enteric and API layers as well as core expansion were noted. In contrast, fusion of the enteric layer that led to bead agglomeration was prevalent when the beads were stored under high temperature and high humidity.
In addition to core pellet expansion, the development of cracks and voids in the API layer of the 5°C samples increased with exposure time. The immobilized beads were removed repeatedly from the high-humidity chamber and then scanned for 30–40 min in the X-ray micro-CT system where the temperature reached approximately 30°C. This may have influenced the development of changes in the beads, but it was found that immobilized beads scanned once initially and then stored in the same 5°C/98% RH conditions uninterrupted for 6 days of exposure also showed a swelling of the core and a loss of distinction between the core and API layers. Therefore, the core expansion observed should be caused by the MCC absorbing moisture rather than the sample preparation procedure.
Since the imaging data suggested thermomechanical changes of the coating structure, thermal characterization was conducted for investigation. The small changes of the heat capacity over T g for the materials studied make it difficult to measure T g by DSC. Fadda and his coworkers compared T g measurement of plasticized methacrylic polymer using DSC, DMA, and TDSC and found the same trends in the T g values. They demonstrated DMA as a useful tool to measure T g of plasticized polymer films in the dry state and while immersed in water and observed a profound drop of T g for the methacrylate copolymer films when exposed to water ( ).
The DMA results suggested that the peak temperature of tan δ was around 90°C for “dry” enteric coating polymer. Note the actual moisture content in the test sample was unknown. As expected, the exposure to moisture decreased the glass transition temperature range. Although the accurate onset of T g could not be pinpointed from the current data set, the results suggested that softening of materials started at a temperature much lower than 50°C when the materials were exposed to high humidity, e.g. , 85% RH. This was consistent in trend with results obtained by Basit and et al . ( ). They reported the T g of unplasticized methacrylate copolymer dropped from 150°C as in the dry state to 20°C as in the wet state, and for triethyl citrate plasticized methacrylate copolymer, as in the case of Acryl-Eze system, the T g decreased from 80°C (dry) to 17°C (wet). This moisture reduced T g of enteric polymer triggered different coating failure pathways for enteric coated beads stored at differing temperatures.
Refrigerated storage, when coupled with high humidity, has shown a negative impact on the integrity of the film coatings. The visible cracks extended from the drug layer to the outer enteric layer, leading to premature drug release in the acid challenge stage of dissolution test. It was the moisture ingress through the coatings and into the hygroscopic MCC core that provided the driver for the core to expand. When the fracture toughness of the polymer was exceeded due to swelling pressure, the API layer would fracture ( ), as the API was only loosely “glued” together by the HPMC binder. The cracks propagated through the API layer and fractured the enteric coating, which had become brittle when stored below the T g (17°C as reported ( )) of the wet enteric polymer. In other words, brittle fracture occurred when the API and enteric layers could no longer handle the stress induced by moisture intake and core expansion.
The coating failure mode at higher temperatures such as 40°C, however, was quite different from the low-temperature coating failure mode, in that its hallmark was a substantial “melt flow” of the coatings. No coating cracks were observed because the temperature ( e.g. , 40°C) was above the T g (17–20°C) of the enteric coating, and the polymer showed its elasticity with plastic deformation in response to moisture ingress and core swelling. However, over time, the enteric coating became mobile and started to thin out in some areas, leading to drug diffusion through the defects in the thinned area of enteric coating in the gastric challenge. Prolonged storage at higher temperature and high humidity eventually led to bead coalescence and loss of structural integrity of the enteric and drug coatings.
Beads exposed to moisture at ambient temperature fared better in acid resistance than those stored in refrigeration or at higher temperatures. Substantial coating fracture and melt flow of the polymers were avoided because the temperature was close to the T g of the enteric polymer, allowing a prolonged stage of maintaining structural integrity due to a good balance of coating flexibility and rigidity. Ultimately, the slow relaxation of polymer chains will cause structural damage as manifested by gradually increased drug release in the acid challenge stage of dissolution test.
CONCLUSIONS
Various analytical tools were used to trouble shoot the premature drug release in the acid stage of dissolution test for enteric coated beads which were exposed to moisture. SEM and X-ray CT imaging showed at 5°C, the beads formed cracks in both the drug layer and enteric coating, while at 40°C, the beads coalesced with their surface coatings migrating onto neighboring beads. Thermal analysis via DMA indicated the moisture saturated beads had a significantly suppressed T g to around 20°C, which caused the polymer to exhibit either brittle fracture at 5°C, or melt congeal at 40°C. The cause for crack initiation and brittle fracture at a low temperature was tensile stress applied to the coatings due to moisture ingress into the hygroscopic MCC core and consequent core swelling. Non-destructive X-ray CT imaging of individually immobilized beads enabled the time elapse study, providing insights into the kinetics of coating structural changes.
The corroborative data of thermal and imaging analysis showed two distinct modes of coating failure for the enteric coated beads depending on storage conditions, because of the intertwining effect of moisture and temperature on coating structure integrity. To mitigate the risk of enteric coating failure for enteric coated products (beads or tablets), a moisture control strategy should be employed during manufacturing, packaging, storage, and shipping processes. The enteric coated beads need to be maintained at well below the water activity level where failure has been observed in this study, and packaging providing moisture protection should be utilized for both bulk beads and final capsules to ensure successful performance of the enteric coated products.