INTRODUCTION
Selection of drug delivery approach is a crucial decision for the clinical and commercial success of a drug, particularly for poorly water-soluble drugs that require solubility and bioavailability enhancement. Recent reviews provide detailed description of such drug delivery/formulation approaches ( , , , , ). Selection of a solubility enhancement technique should be based upon the application for which enhanced solubility is required. The term ‘solubility’ is relevant at various stages of drug development with different objectives for a chemist, a preformulation scientist, a process engineer, a formulation scientist, etc. For instance, a drug can be dissolved in organic solvent like dichloromethane for a process solubility enhancement (eventually evaporating this solvent to obtain a desired solid drug substance/drug product); however, that solubility data is not useful for a formulation scientist trying to formulate an intravenous injection of the drug. As a result of these different requirements for information, a lot of solubility data is generated during drug development and drug product formulation. A holistic view of these data could provide new insights into addressing product and process solubility challenges.
This research explores one such approach, utilizing observations from drug salt screening to formulate amorphous solid dispersions (ASDs) of a poorly water-soluble drug that is weakly ionic and not very amenable to formation of stable drug salts. Typical challenges associated with isolation of stable drug salts ( , , , ) and use of hazardous solvents ( ) for industrial processes like spray drying that are popularly used for preparation of amorphous solid dispersions are circumvented in this approach. In vivo study substantiates the feasibility of this approach.
Itraconazole (Fig. 1 ) was taken as a model drug for the following reasons: 1. It is a poorly water-soluble drug (about 1 ng/mL at neutral pH) and is classified as BCS class II ( , ). 2. It is a very weak base (pKa 2 and 3.7) which is not very amenable to salt formation and literature reports challenges in establishing a robust process for obtaining crystalline drug salt of Itraconazole ( ). 3. Crystalline and amorphous forms of drug salt have been reported in salt screening with different solvents ( ). 4. Present market formulation of Itraconazole (Sporanox® capsules, Janssen) is an amorphous solid dispersion that is prepared in a solvent mixture of dichloromethane and ethanol ( ). Dichloromethane is considered as a hazardous solvent, and substitution with greener solvents is recommended ( , , ). Fig. 1 Structure and properties of model drug Itraconazole
In this study, salification was used for dissolving the drug in ‘preferred solvents’ ( ) and mixed with suitable polymers to produce amorphous solid dispersions. Hypothesis for this research is derived from interesting prior research data on how salification works in different solvents ( , , ) and how process solvent selection can be guided considering safety, environmental impact, occupational health hazard, etc. ( ).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Itraconazole (ITZ) was supplied by Nosch Labs (Hyderabad, India). Hypromellose (HPMC, Methocel™ E5) was procured from Dow Wolff Cellulosics Gmbh (Bomlitz, Germany), Hypromellose Acetate Succinate (HPMC-AS, AquaSolve™) was procured from Ashland Speciality Ingredients (Wilmington, USA), and Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, Kollidon® 30) was procured from BASF (Ludwigshafen, Germany). All solvents and reagents were of analytical or high-performance liquid chromatographic grade procured from Rankem (Mumbai, India).
Methods
Salification requires two- to three-unit difference in the pKa of the acid and base ( ). Itraconazole (‘Itraconazole base’) has pKa 2 and 3.7 ( ) requiring strong acids (pKa < 1.7) for salification. Preliminary study was performed with inorganic acid (hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid and nitric acid) addition to drug slurry. Briefly, the procedure involved screening 50, 100, 500 and 1000 μL of 0.1 N acids. Once acid selection was narrowed to 0.1 N HCl, 50–1000 μL was tested in increments of 50 μL. Six hundred microlitres was required for dissolving 100 mg of Itraconazole . Hydrochloric acid was selected from preliminary screening, and a three-stage experimental plan (Fig. 2 ) was designed to assess feasibility of concept. It included (a) Solvent screening (b) Polymer screening (c) Prototype screening Fig. 2 Scheme of experiments for feasibility testing of concept
Glass forming ability of Itraconazole was confirmed with differential scanning calorimetry DSC Q1000 (TA instruments, New Castle, DE). Data was analysed with Universal Analysis 2000 thermal analysis software (TA instruments, New Castle, DE). Crystalline Itraconazole was heated to 10°C above its melting point of 166°C and rapidly cooled at 20°C/min. This sample was reheated at 2°C/min until 170°C. Glass transition event confirmed the glass forming ability of Itraconazole. Separately, characteristic XRD peaks of crystalline Itraconazole were identified. For XRD study of amorphous Itraconazole, a melt-quenched sample was prepared by melting Itraconazole and quenching in liquid nitrogen.
Solvent Screening
Solvent screening had two sets of trials. Trial set 1 had excess drug added to 1 mL of each solvent, enlisted in Fig. 2 as preferred solvents and usable solvents, incubated for 24 h and solubility estimated by HPLC. In trial set 2, 100 mg of drug (one dose equivalent) was suspended in 1 mL of each solvent (shortlisted from set 1) and sonicated for dispersing the drug. Incremental amounts of concentrated hydrochloric acid (50–1000 μL) were added to this suspension and intermittently sonicated to obtain a clear solution. Assuming a practical process time for ASD preparation by solvent evaporation/antisolvent preparation to be not more than 24 h, a 24 h chemical stability study was performed for the above described drug solutions using HPLC where the mobile phase consisted of dibasic potassium phosphate and mixture of acetonitrile and tetrahydrofuran. A 100 × 4.0 mm Hypersil ODS and 3-μm column were used at ambient conditions with a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min and UV detection at 225 nm. For ensuring integrity of parent molecule in salified drug stock solution, mass spectrophotometry was used. Mass number was measured in Waters mass spectrometer (Milford, USA) with ESI source, at intervals of 6 up to 24 h. To understand proton affinity of the drug’s functional moieties, 1H NMR spectra were recorded at 400 MHz on a Varian Mercury Plus (California, USA).
Both trial sets were studied for crystallization initiation by observing a drop of the solution (during solvent evaporation) under a polarized light microscope using Nikon Eclipse LV100POL Polarizing Microscope (Nikon, Japan) with objective of ×10 and ocular magnification of ×10. Birefringence was considered as sign of crystallinity.
Polymer Screening
Popular approach for polymer screening is use of theoretical computations like Hildebrand and Hansen solubility parameter and Flory-Huggins model ( ); however, these methods are for binary systems (drug and polymer) and can have large deviations for complex systems involving solvents. Therefore, polymer screening was performed with small-scale experiments as per a three-stage screening protocol as stated below: 1. Identifying a common solvent for the drug and polymer (based on observations of solvent screening for drug solution, acidified solvents were included in study) 2. Thermal analysis of solvent cast films, with different drug loadings, to ascertain drug-polymer miscibility 3. Two point dissolution assay of drug-polymer dispersions to grade polymer performance in solubility enhancement and supersaturation
For preparation of polymer dispersions in solvents, polymer powder was added to the solvent vortex, under continuous mechanical stirring. These dispersions were qualitatively characterized for appearance, homogeneity and relative viscosity. Pure solvents, acidified solvents and mixtures of alcohol and water were used in the study (Fig. 2 ).
Prototype Screening
With the selected solvent and polymer, drug solid dispersion was prepared using a spray dryer Labultima LU-222 (Mumbai, India). It was used in an open cycle configuration with inlet temperature of 65°C, outlet temperature of 45°C and atomising gas pressure of 1.2 bar. Dried powders were characterized for physical, chemical and thermal properties. Samples were subjected to stress testing, in open pans, at 40°C/75% RH for 4 weeks.
Characterization of Solid Dispersions
Solid State of Drug in Solid Dispersion
Solid dispersions were analysed with DSC Q1000 (TA instruments, New Castle, DE). Data was analysed with Universal Analysis 2000 thermal analysis software (TA instruments, New Castle, DE). For these measurements, 3–5 mg powder sample was placed in standard aluminium pans, equilibrated at 0°C and held isothermal for 5 min. Pierced lids were used to remove the volatile solvents in the sample. This was followed by heating at a ramp rate of 3°C/min from 0 to 180°C with a modulation temperature amplitude of 1°C and a modulation period of 40 s. All measurements were performed under nitrogen purge at a flow rate of 50 mL/min. Observations of DSC were further confirmed with X-ray diffraction study. At ambient temperature and humidity conditions, powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) was performed with Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer (Bruker Corporation, Karlsruhe, Germany). A Cu K-a 1tube (wavelength 1.54056 Å) was the source, set at 40 kV and 40 mA. The divergence and scattering slits were set at 0.5°, and the receiving slit was set at 0.15 mm. A θ–2θ continuous scan at 3°/min from 2.5 to 50° 2θ was used.
Chemical State of Drug in Solid Dispersion
Raman spectroscopy was used as a chemical fingerprinting tool. Prototype solid dispersion was studied with InVia Reflex confocal microscope (Renishaw, UK). Data acquisition was done using an exposure time of 10 s for 10 accumulations. Five-point mapping was performed. Raman spectra were collected using an extended 1200 groove per millimetre dispersive grating in a spectral window from 100 to 3500 cm −1 . Comparative study was performed with crystalline drug and drug salt (without polymer). Data was further verified with FTIR studies. FTIR (Agilent Technologies Cary 660, USA) was used in conjunction with attenuated total reflection (ATR) accessories. This provides benefit of testing the samples without preparation with Nujol or KBr. Sample was placed on the internal reflection element (IRE) of the ATR sampling accessory (Pike Technologies, MIRacle ATR, USA), and infrared spectrum was captured with sample scans 16, background scans 64, resolution and aperture (cm −1 ) 4.
Stability of Solid Dispersion
Stability of prototype sample was assessed with a short-term (4 weeks) stress testing, exposing the samples in open petri plates at 40°C/75% RH. Separately, moisture sorption study was performed using Dynamic Vapour Sorption (DVS) apparatus, DVS Advantage 1, (Surface Measurement Systems, UK). About 20 mg of sample was placed on the DVS pan at 25°C, dried at 0% RH and then exposed to 90% RH with dm/dt stage type. Percentage of water sorbed or desorbed was recorded. Sample from DVS study was analysed with DSC and XRD to evaluate phase transformations.
In Vivo Study
Male Wistar rats were used for the bioavailability study. Study was approved by the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee of Aurigene (Hyderabad, India) and was in accordance with guidelines of the Committee for Purpose of Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government of India. Nine rats were divided into three groups with three rats in each group and kept under controlled laboratory conditions. There, test preparations (Itraconazole, Itraconazole salt and solid dispersion) were prepared extemporaneously as suspensions and administered orally using a feeding tube. Blood samples (approximately 300 μL) were collected, predose, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 24 h, into a micro centrifugation tube containing Potassium EDTA as an anticoagulant. From the centrifuged samples, the supernatant plasma was separated and kept at −20°C until further analysis. Itraconazole detection was performed with LC-MS. The mobile phase consisted of mixture of water and acetonitrile (25:75 v / v ), and the flow rate was 1 mL/min. Acetonitrile was used as a precipitating agent for the plasma samples. The organic layer was analysed using HPLC. Plasma concentrations versus time profile and the pharmacokinetic parameters were estimated.
RESULTS
Itraconazole had melting point of about 166°C. Glass transition temperature was observed at about 57°C (Fig. 3 a). Characteristic XRD peaks of crystalline Itraconazole were identified (Fig. 3 b). Melt quenched Itraconazole showed rapid re-crystallization; therefore, ambient temperature XRD was not a useful supplementary technique to DSC for amorphous Itraconazole. Fig. 3 a DSC thermogram of crystalline Itraconazole showing melting point and glass transition temperature of amorphous Itraconazole. b XRD of crystalline Itraconazole
Solvent Selection
Solvent screening protocol was designed with a defined selection criteria and a sequential screening process categorizing the solvents as per previously reported classification of preferred solvents and usable solvents ( ). Selection criteria for this study were as below: 1. Minimum solvent requirement for dissolving one dose equivalent drug. 2. On drying, these drug solutions should give either a stable amorphous drug or a slow crystalizing drug. 3. Manufacturing process should be efficient and industrially feasible.
Drug solubility was evaluated in preferred solvents and usable solvents (as per classification in reference ). Pure solvents (without acid) and acidified solvents were used with both classes of solvents. Details are provided in Fig. 2 .
Itraconazole was found to have solubility in various preferred solvents, and acidification of these solvents increased the solubility further. When droplet of drug solution was observed for drying (under polarized light microscope), induction of crystallization (Fig. 4 ) occurred at different rates. Solvents with high drug solubility had higher rates of crystallization, and the same trend was seen in both pure solvents and acidified solvents. Methanol, ethanol and isopropyl alcohol had relatively less drug solubility than ethylacetate; however, when acidified, they were able to readily dissolve one dose equivalent of drug in 1 mL. Crystal induction times graded the solvents in following order of ethylacetate < ethanol < methanol < isopropyl alcohol, with rapid crystallization (least crystal induction time) in ethylacetate and ethanol. Based on low chemical reactivity of methanol and acids ( ) and its low boiling point ( ), it was selected as solvent for preparing drug solution by salification. Stability of parent moiety was confirmed with HPLC analysis (Fig. 5 a) and monitoring mass number (Fig. 5 b). Protonation of the drug was studied with 1 H NMR (Fig. 5 c) and was found similar to previously reported literature ( ) confirming salification. Fig. 4 Crystallization initiation in drug solution droplet as observed under polarized microscope ( PLM ) Fig. 5 Drug solution stability estimated at 12 h by a HPLC, b mass spectroscopy and salification confirmed by c 1 H NMR
Polymer Selection
To ensure molecular mixing of drug and polymer, it is highly recommended to use a common solvent for them ( ). With methanol as solvent for drug solution, polymers were dissolved in methanol and methanol-water mixtures of 90:10 w / w . Clear polymer dispersions were obtained with all polymers except HPMC in methanol, which was slightly hazy. Drug loading from 10 to 80% w / w was prepared by mixing drug stock solution and polymer dispersions. Cast films of these compositions were analysed with DSC (Fig. 6 ) and dissolution studies (Fig. 7 ). Sixty per cent w / w drug-loaded HPMC provided highest drug concentrations in drug release studies in simulated intestinal fluids. At drug loading of 10% w / w PVP provided high drug concentrations but with increasing drug loads, a decline in drug release was observed. Two solvent systems, methanol and methanol-water of 90:10 v / v , were used for HPMC. Objective was to study the impact of small amount of water on the performance of solid dispersions Solid dispersions of HPMC with either methanol as the solvent or methanol water 90:10 v / v as solvent did not show difference in drug release. Based on these observations (Fig. 7 ), it was evident that type of polymer and drug loading had impact on drug release. Solid dispersion with HPMC in methanol-water 90:10 v / v and 60% w / w drug loading was considered for prototype screening. Fig. 6 DSC thermograms of Itraconazole salt ( a ), HPMC solid dispersion ( b ), HPMCAS solid dispersion ( c ) and PVP solid dispersion ( d ). Drug loading at 60% w / w Fig. 7 Dissolution drug release study of Itraconazole salt with different polymers. n = 3; error bars represent standard deviation
Prototype Selection
Spray-dried solid dispersion of Itraconazole in HPMC showed a distinct Tg during thermal analysis indicating amorphous state of drug (Fig. 8 a). This was confirmed with XRD where characteristic peaks of crystalline drug were not found in the solid dispersion (Fig. 9 a). When the DVS-treated solid dispersion sample was analysed with DSC (Fig. 8 b) and XRD (Fig. 9 b), no phase transformation (amorphous to crystalline) was observed, when compared to initial samples, indicating stability of the amorphous solid dispersions. Fig. 8 DSC thermogram of Itraconazole salt with HPMC solid dispersion before DVS study ( a ) and after DVS study ( b ) Fig. 9 XRD of Itraconazole salt with HPMC solid dispersion ( a ) before DVS study and ( b ) after DVS study
Raman spectra for Itraconazole and Itraconazole salt were compared with the spectrum of solid dispersion. Distinct peaks at 430, 1697 and 3123 cm −1 , corresponding to Itraconazole, were not observed in the solid dispersions. A comparison of Itraconazole with the Itraconazole salt indicated the absence of the Raman peak at 900 cm −1 (possibly shifted to 875 cm −1 ). Presence of this peak was used as an indicator of the presence of Itraconazole salt form in the solid dispersions (Fig. 10 ). These observations were further verified by the FTIR data (Fig. 11 ). Characteristic peaks of Itraconazole were identified in regions of 1550–1660 cm −1 (carboxylate group O-C-O), 1623 and 1560 cm −1 (N-H secondary stretching) and 1073 cm −1 (C-N stretch). Presence of chlorine group in itraconazole salt was identified at 700–850 cm −1 . Fig. 10 Raman spectrum of Itraconazole salt solid dispersion compared to crystalline Itraconazole and Itraconazole salt Fig. 11 FTIR spectrum of Itraconazole salt solid dispersion compared to crystalline Itraconazole and Itraconazole salt
Stability of Solid Dispersion
DSC and XRD study of stability samples indicated no phase transformation (amorphous to crystalline), compared to initial samples, indicating stability of the amorphous solid dispersions. In the DVS study, moisture sorption was found to be not more than 5.0% w / w . When compared to naïve polymer, it was <0.15% w / w . Karl Fischer titration was used to determine moisture content of samples. Initial moisture content for HPMC sample was 4.82% w / w , and for solid dispersion, it was 5.10% w / w . DVS samples were sufficient only for DSC and XRD study. DVS data served as indirect indicator of sample moisture content. For both samples, no hysteresis was found between the isotherms of sorption and desorption, indicating that the samples were not significantly hygroscopic. Isotherm plots are presented in Fig. 12 a, b (HPMC polymer and solid dispersion, respectively). Fig. 12 Isotherm plots of a HPMC polymer and b HPMC solid dispersion
In the DSC study of solid dispersion (sample before and after DVS study), shift in glass transition temperature was less than 3°C, and in both samples, Tg was well above the ambient storage conditions. It complied with rule of Tg-50°C for physical stability of amorphous solid dispersions. This assures that the solid dispersion has high probability of being stable.
In Vivo Study
Significant enhancement of the C max and AUC for Itraconazole salt and HPMC solid dispersion was observed compared to Itraconazole. HPMC solid dispersion formulation showed 6.7- and 45-fold higher exposure (AUC) compared to Itraconazole salt and Itraconazole, respectively. Pharmacokinetic parameters of tested samples are presented in Table I . Table I Summary of Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Itraconazole, Itraconazole Salt and Itraconazole-HPMC Solid Dispersion, After Peroral Administration to Rats ( n = 3) PK parameters Statistics Formulations Itraconazole-HPMC solid dispersion Itraconozole salt Itraconozole C max (ng/mL) Mean 1006 195 40 SD 263 66.7 15.1 %CV 26.2 34.2 37.8 t max (h) Mean 8 5 7 SD 0.0 2.31 1.15 %CV 0.0 43.3 15.7 AUC (0–24) (ng/h/mL) Mean 14,690 2199 326 SD 3680 498 373 %CV 25.1 22.6 114 SD standard deviation, C max maximum concentration, T max time to achieve maximum concentration, AUC area under the curve
DISCUSSIONS
In situ salification approach has its earliest references in the reports of drug solubilization by pH adjustment, a common method of enhancing drug solubility of poorly water-soluble drugs and obtaining solutions of drug for oral and parenteral applications. pH adjustment solubilizes drug by forming in situ salt/salification ( ). This work has differently applied pH adjustment principles, and the two major differences are briefly described here: 1. Drug solution obtained by pH adjustment is used ‘as is’ and therefore requires careful selection of solvent (s), physical and chemical stability assessment of solution and inclusion of stabilizing additives (if required) to formulate product with sufficient shelf life. In this approach, drug solution is an intermediate stage of product manufacturing. A solid product is obtained by solvent evaporation, and solvent is relevant only in trace amounts as residual solvent. Also, solution stability requirement is limited until solution is processed to obtain the solid powder. 2. Drug solutions prepared by pH adjustment approach have the risk of drug precipitation in body fluids. In presented approach, a precipitation inhibiting polymer was added to drug solution for ensuring that the drug is not precipitated and is obtained in a stable amorphous form that could provide maximum solubility of drug.
Salification reactions are governed by the intrinsic solubility and dissociation/ionization constants of reactants and reaction products. Literature reports variations in the solubility and dissociation constants of substances when measured in different solvents. For example, hydrochloric acid has pKa of −8 in water and 1.8 in DMSO ( ). This variation could give a no salt observation during drug salt screening in different solvents or limit the applicability of pH adjustment approach for dissolving a drug in solvent. Different solvent-acidifier combinations provide different solid forms of a drug ( ). These observations indicate that desired drug form (amorphous, crystalline, salt, cocrystal, etc.) can be engineered with a thorough understanding of the solute-solvent interactions and interplaying thermodynamic and kinetic factors. This also provides an opportunity to explore possibility of selecting green and sustainable solvents that could be suitably combined with acids/bases and drug to give the desired drug product. Hypothesis testing was done with model drug Itraconazole.
An aqueous solution of Itraconazole (10 mg/mL) is obtained by complexation with cyclodextrin and pH adjustment ( ). However, without cyclodextrin, it has very low solubility even in highly acidified water ( ). In this study, when similar pH adjustment was attempted in organic solvents, substantial solubility improvement was observed. This formed the basis of presented study where Itraconazole was salified in situ to obtain a solution and then suitably processed with polymers to obtain amorphous Itraconazole with benefits of maximum solubility (compared to crystalline form) in the form of amorphous solid dispersion. Previously reported salts ( ), cocrystals ( ) and non-salt acid mixtures ( ) of Itraconazole have reported solubility enhancement; however, there are no published reports on their supersaturation and possible precipitation that may result from supersaturation. Theoretically, these products will dissolve to give supersaturated solutions at the drug absorption site and may have the risk of intraluminal precipitation that could adversely affect drug bioavailability. With the presented approach, an amorphous drug is obtained which will dissolve and can precipitate/crystallize only if effective concentrations of polymer are not present. Polymers retard crystallization of amorphous drugs and sustain supersaturation ( ).
Solvent selection, polymer selection, preparation and characterization of solid dispersions have been discussed in earlier sections. For ensuring industrial application of this research, solvent selection was the critical aspect. Other than the green chemistry and sustainability aspects, due consideration was required from perspective of the drying process efficiency (like solvent boiling point, heat of vaporization, solvent viscosity, etc.) and achieving acceptable residual solvents in the final product. Methanol efficiently replaced dichloromethane as solvent for preparation of amorphous solid dispersion of Itraconazole.
Counterions of drug salts provide various physicochemical features to a product ( , , ). Unlike the ionic liquids ( ) where regulatory understanding is still nascent, drug salts are better understood both in vitro and in vivo . This approach for salified amorphous solid dispersions requires further studies to understand effect of various product parameters process conditions and environmental factors.
CONCLUSION
Given the advantages of physical and chemical stability of crystalline materials, most drug salt screenings would continue to focus on generating crystalline drug salts. However, this study provides evidence that amorphous salts and ionic mixtures that are often not pursued during drug development, anticipating risks of instability and clinical surprises from their metastable state, may find a very different and useful application in drug product development. For weekly ionic drugs, drug salt preparation and isolation per se has limitations. However, when the same principles are applied in situ and are followed by subsequent processing stages (in this case formation of solid dispersion), it can provide a novel method for leveraging the solubility features of salts and amorphous state. This approach testifies the feasibility of alternative processes for replacing hazardous organic solvents. In today’s time, it has become imperative that pharmaceutical industry inculcates principles of green solvents and sustainable processes in its research and manufacturing.
Encouraging in vivo performance of this product has reinforced the technical feasibility and potential industrial application of this approach.