INTRODUCTION
Naringenin (5, 7, 4′-trihydroxyflavanone) belongs to the flavanone class of flavanoids and is abundantly present in citrus fruits. It has therapeutic interventions as antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antidiabetic and anticancer agent ( ). Poor solubility, fast metabolism and inadequate bioavailability hinder the application of flavanoids, which can be addressed through increased absorption, solubility and stability ( ). NRG shows high inter-individual pharmacokinetic variation with rapid metabolism in the liver leading to low in vivo bioavailability (5.8%) limiting its clinical applicability ( , , ).
Beholding the physicochemical properties of molecule such as log P = 1.6, crystalline nature (melting point 250°C) and low solubility (9.8 μg/mL), it can be predicted that dissolution may be a rate-limiting step for absorption and low bioavailability of the drug. In order to improve solubility and absorption, various attempts were carried out in the past using nanoparticles ( ), complexing agents like β-cyclodextrin ( , ), lipidic carriers such as self-nanoemulsifying drug delivery system ( ), phospholipid complexes ( ), solid lipid nanoparticles ( ), elastic liposomes ( ), solid dispersions ( ) and gastro-retentive mucoadhesive system ( ). All the above mentioned delivery systems suffer from poor drug loading, physical stability, encapsulation, degradation, drug leakage and toxicity of the carrier, solubiliser or complexing agents. Moreover, the effect of formulation on drug absorption and intestinal permeability had not been addressed in previous studies. To overcome these challenges and to improve oral delivery of the selected molecule, an alternative delivery system must be designed.
To the best of our knowledge, formulation of selected flavanoid as nanosuspensions by bottom-up approach had not been explored earlier. Nanosuspensions, also called nanocrystal, is a carrier-free drug delivery system consisting of pure drug and stabiliser with mean particle size in the nanometre range, typically between 10 and 1000 nm. The approach suits well for compounds with physical properties such as crystalline nature, high molecular weight, high melting point, water insolubility with high log P ( ). The system could act as a valuable tool for brick dust insoluble molecules with benefits of increased efficiency reduced co-solvent toxicity, particle size and increased saturation solubility, dissolution, drug loading and stability along with other particulate dosage form benefits. Some of the flavanoids like quercetin ( ), rutin ( ), myricetin ( ) and hespertin ( ) had been reported earlier with better physicochemical and pharmacokinetic profile in the form of nanosuspensions.
Preparation of nanosuspensions involves formation of particles that can be obtained either by particle size reduction of larger crystals forming nanocrystals (top-down approach) or by building up particles through precipitation of dissolved molecules (bottom-up approach) ( ). The top-down techniques include application of high energy processes to reduce the particle size using jet milling, pearl/ball milling and high-pressure homogenisation. However, there are certain drawbacks with these methods like contamination, uncontrolled particle growth, morphology and wide particle size distribution. Bottom-up approach involves precipitation of drug dissolved in solvent by addition of an antisolvent. This technique holds tremendous potential with respect to improving bioavailability by producing amorphous drug particles (<100 nm) ( ). Although the precipitation process is useful, it often leads to rapid particle growth and poor size distribution. This problem can be corrected by use of ultrasound through controlled nucleation and crystallisation ( ).
Hence, the present study was designed to develop nanosuspensions using sonoprecipitation method for improving bioavailability through enhanced drug dissolution, wherein the effect of drug and stabiliser concentration on particle size was studied to achieve a stable system. The optimised formulation was then evaluated and characterised for dissolution, intestinal permeability and pharmacokinetic studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Naringenin (MW = 272.25, purity >95%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, polyvinylpyrrolidone PVP K-90 (M.wt. 3,60,000) was obtained from TCI chemicals, polyoxyethylene sorbitan monooleate (Tween 80) was purchased from Loba chemie, hydroxy propyl methyl cellulose (HPMC E5) was obtained from BASF (Shanghai, China) and Pluronic F68 was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All other reagents used such as methanol, ethanol, acetone and mannitol were of pharmaceutical grade.
Methods
Preparation of Naringenin Nanosuspensions by Sonoprecipitation Method
NRG-NS were formulated by sonoprecipitation method as reported earlier in the literature ( ). NRG was dissolved in ethanol (30 mg/mL) and polymer was added in distilled water to prepare solvent (organic phase) and antisolvent system (aqueous phase), respectively. In brief, 1 mL of organic phase was quickly injected using a syringe (22 needle gauze) into 10 mL of aqueous phase under magnetic stirring at 1000 rpm for 5 min which led to precipitation of drug particles. Samples were immediately subjected to sonication using ultrasonic processor (Sonics & Materials, Inc., Vibra cell VCX 750). The period of ultrasound burst was set to 5 s on and off for a time period of 8 min under ice-cold conditions (3–5°C). After sonication, stirring was continued for 3 h to allow evaporation of the solvent. For long-term storage of the final product, the freshly prepared nanosuspensions were stored in a refrigerator for 12 h to maintain cold condition followed by chilling using dry ice (−75°C) and subsequently freeze-dried (Freeze dryer, FD5508; Skadi-Europe) at −50°C for 12 h, followed by a secondary drying phase at 20°C for 4 h. The schematic representation for preparation of nanosuspensions is shown in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 Schematic representation for preparation of nanosuspensions by sonoprecipitation method; double arrows show the optimisation steps in process
Stabilisation of Formulation and Processing Conditions
Different formulation parameters like type and concentration of stabiliser, drug concentration and sonication time were optimised. Preparation of NRG-NS at different concentrations (0.15–1% w / v ) of stabilisers PVP K-90, hydroxy propyl methyl cellulose (HPMC E5) and Tween 80 (T80) was carried out to achieve minimum particle size and size distribution (Table I ). To understand the effect of drug concentration, formulations containing different drug concentrations (10, 20, 30 and 50 mg/mL) were prepared using a selected stabiliser at a particular concentration. The effect of duration of sonicated waves on reducing particles to nanorange and stabilising the system were studied by applying sonication for varied durations from 5 to 15 min. The optimised sonication time was selected based on particles size and PDI. Table I Screening of Stabilisers and Process Conditions for Optimisation of NRG Nanosuspensions ( n = 3) Containing a Fixed Amount of Drug (10 mg) Sample number Stabiliser Concentration (% w / v ) Processing conditions Mean particle size (nm) PDI Visual observation and inference 1 Without stabiliser – Stirring at 1000 rpm (5 min) followed by sonication (5 s off/on for 10 min) 2580 ± 5.05 0.685 ± 0.276 Large visible particles and precipitates with poor size distribution 2 PVP K-90 0.15 180.7 ± 13.64 0.301 ± 0.224 Transparent suspensions with good particle size distribution and high stability on storage 0.25 308.5 ± 60.08 0.158 ± 0.194 0.5 142.0 ± 5.5 0.17 ± 0.138 1 145.6 ± 17.00 0.262 ± 0.200 3 HPMC E5 0.15 814.0 ± 50.09 0.194 ± 0.301 Turbid suspensions and sedimentation occurred immediately after formation 0.25 1107.0 ± 11.20 0.205 ± 0.158 0.5 906.0 ± 20.47 0.138 ± 0.17 1 853.0 ± 94.32 0.342 ± 0.262 4 T80 0.15 1218.0 ± 7.07 0.465 ± 0.147 Suspensions with turbid aggregates were noticed and found to settle within an hour 0.25 1986.5 ± 7.77 0.376 ± 0.23 0.5 1021.9 ± 11.49 0.243 ± 0.17 1.0 1114.5 ± 7.99 0.224 ± 0.139 PDI polydispersity index
Analytical and Bioanalytical Method Development
HPLC analysis was done using C-18 RP column (Grace Smart RP 18) of dimensions (5 μm, 250 mm × 4.6 mm) to determine NRG concentration. The mixture of acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluroacetic acid (35:65 v / v ) with a flow rate of 1 mL/min was used as mobile phase using PDA detector at λ max of 289 nm to analyse the column effluent. The standard and unknown drug concentrations prepared in appropriate solvents (methanol and PBS pH 7.4) from experiments were injected into the HPLC system. The standard curve was constructed in the range of 8 to 48 ppm in triplicates for calibration with good linearity ( R 2 = 0.9991).
Bioanalytical method was developed for the selected drug using rat plasma. An aliquot (100 μL) of plasma was placed in an Eppendorf tube and mixed with 100 μL of drug solution (containing different concentrations 500 to 5000 ng/mL). To this, fixed volume of 100 μL of internal standard (quercetin with concentration of 4 μg/mL) was added and vortexed for 5 min, followed by addition of methanol as protein precipitating agent (700 L). The samples were vortexed for 5 min followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 5000 rpm at 4°C. Fixed volume of 20 μL of supernatant from each sample was injected into C18 reverse phase HPLC column with similar conditions. Calibration curves were established by plotting peak ratios of NRG to quercetin versus standard concentration with good linearity in triplicates ( R 2 = 0.9891). Representative chromatograms are shown in Fig. of the supplementary file .
Characterisation of Nanosuspensions
Particle Size, Polydispersity Index (PDI) and Zeta Potential
Particle size, polydispersity index (PDI) and zeta potential of nanosuspensions were measured using dynamic light scattering in a Malvern zeta sizer (Nano ZS; Malvern Instruments, UK). For analysis, 0.1 mL of respective formulation was diluted ten times with triple distilled water. All measurements were taken in triplicates. Z-Average ( d , nm) PDI and zeta potential were reported ( ).
Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC)
DSC was used as a thermo-analytical technique to understand the physical nature and chemical interaction among the drug and excipients. Thermograms of pure drug, PVP K-90, physical mixture and optimised nanosuspensions were taken using a DSC calorimeter (DSC Shimadzu, DSC-60, Kyoto, Japan). Accurately weighed samples (5 mg) were heated in an aluminium pan at a heating rate of 5°C/min at the range of 200°C under nitrogen atmosphere.
X-Ray Diffraction Studies (XRD)
X-ray diffraction analysis was employed to detect the crystallinity of drug upon precipitation from antisolvent solution. XRD patterns for pure drug, PVP K-90, physical mixture and optimised lyophilised nanosuspensions were taken using an XRD-6000 diffractometer (Philips P) using Ni-filtered, CuKα radiation with a wavelength of 1.5405 Å as x-ray source over the diffraction angle range (2 θ ) of 5–55° at 1°/min at a voltage of 40 kV, 30 mA current ( ).
Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectroscopy
Drug–excipient interactions were studied using FTIR spectroscopy (Perkin-Elmer 1600, V-650 Jasco). The spectra for drug, PVP K-90, drug–PVP K-90 physical mixture (1:1) and optimised nanosuspensions were taken. Samples were prepared in KBr discs (5 mg of drug in 100 mg of KBr) and compressed using a hydraulic press at 15 t pressure to form a pellet. Prepared pellets were fixed and scanned for IR spectra from 4000 to 450 cm −1 .
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)
The surface morphology of pure drug, drug recrystallised from ethanol–water (1:10) system and nanosuspensions were visualised using a scanning electron microscope (Hitachi High Technology America, Inc. S-3700N). Before observation, a single drop of sample was mounted on an aluminium stub and air dried while crude samples were fixed directly onto metal stubs and secured onto an SEM sample holder. Samples were sputter coated with conducting gold layer of approximately 10 mm thickness under vacuum and viewed at a working distance of 10 mm at an accelerating voltage of 30 kV at ×500–10,000 magnification.
Stability Studies
The optimised nanosuspensions were stored at three different temperature conditions of 4–8°C, 40°C (75 ± 5% RH) and 28 ± 2°C (65 ± 5% RH) for 30 days. At respective time intervals of 0, 5th, 15th and 30th day, 1 mL of sample from formulation was taken and diluted ten times with triple distilled water for measurement of particle size. All measurements were done in triplicates.
Dissolution Testing for NRG Nanosuspensions
USP type II apparatus (DS 8000; LABINDIA, Mumbai, India) was used for dissolution studies of pure drug and optimised nanosuspensions containing an equivalent amount of 30 mg NRG in samples. The samples were dispersed in 900 mL of dissolution media consisting of phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). The temperature (37 ± 0.5°C) and stirring rate (100 rpm) were maintained during the experiment. Aliquots of 5 mL were taken at fixed time intervals (10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 60 min) and replaced with the same volume of fresh dissolution medium. Samples were filtered though 0.1-μm nylon membrane syringe filters (Sigma-Aldrich) immediately before dilution. Drug concentration was determined with RP-HPLC with PDA detector at λ max of 289 nm as per analytical method discussed earlier ( ). The percentage release from bulk drug and optimised nanosuspensions were compared. The experiments were conducted in triplicate and results were reported as percentage drug dissolved for pure drug and nanosuspensions.
In Vitro Non-Everted Intestinal Sac Study
In vitro non-everted intestinal sac study was performed according to the previously described methods with slight modifications ( ). The protocol was approved by the institutional animal ethical committee (IAEC) with number NIP/5/2016/PE/155. Briefly, the rats were divided into two groups (pure drug and formulation) each consisting of three animals. Both the groups of animals were sacrificed using anaesthetic ether; the intestine was surgically removed and flushed with 50 mL ice-cold saline. The small intestine was cut into three segments of duodenum, jejunum and ileum of equal length (5 cm). One millilitre of each sample containing pure drug and formulation were filled in the normal sacs (mucosal side), and both ends of the sac were ligated tightly. The sacs containing pure drug and formulation were placed in a beaker containing 15 mL of PBS (pH 7.4) under stirring conditions of 100 rpm at 37°C with constant aeration for the study period. The transport of drug from mucosal to serosal side was determined by sampling the serosal medium periodically for 120 min by taking 2-mL samples from both groups at predetermined time points. The concentration of drug transported from mucosal to serosal direction was measured by developed RP-HPLC under same column conditions at λ max 289 nm.
Calculation of apparent permeability coefficient ( P app ) was done from the following equation C 0 $$ {\mathrm{P}}_{\mathrm{app}}=\mathrm{dQ}/\mathrm{dt}+1/\left({\mathrm{A}+\mathrm{C}}_0\right) $$ where d Q /d t is the transport rate of drug in the serosal medium, A is the surface area of the intestinal sacs and C 0 is the initial concentration inside the sacs.
In Situ Single Pass Intestinal Perfusion (SPIP) Method
The surgical procedure and the in situ single pass intestinal perfusion (SPIP) study were performed according to the previously reported methods ( ). The protocol was approved by IAEC with number NIP/5/2016/PE/155. Briefly, the rats were divided into two groups (pure drug and formulation) consisting of three animals each. These rats were subjected to anaesthesia by thiopental sodium (50 mg/kg, intraperitoneal). A midline incision of 3–4 cm was made on the abdomen of rats and an ileum segment of approximately 10 cm was isolated using the ileo-caecal junction as a distal marker. Semi-circular incisions were made at each end of the ileum and the lumen was rinsed with normal saline (37°C). Both the ends were cannulated with polyethylene tubing and ligated using silk suture. The blank perfusion buffer (phosphate buffer saline, pH 7.4) was first infused for 5 min at a flow rate of 1 mL/min by using a syringe pump (Olives India) and was followed by perfusion of pure drug (dispersed in 0.5% w / v of sodium carboxymethylcellulose NaCMC) and optimised formulation (9.2 mM) at a constant flow rate of 0.2 mL/min for a period of 120 min. The perfusate was collected at 10-min intervals. The ileum segment was covered with isotonic saline-wet gauze. At the end of the perfusion, the length of the ileum segment was measured. Perfusion samples were collected from pure drug and formulation groups at predetermined time points and stored at −80°C until analysis. Drug concentrations in perfusion samples were measured by RP-HPLC with the same column conditions using a PDA detector at λ max 289 nm. Calculations were based on outlet perfusate steady-state concentrations achieved after the selected time points. The steady-state intestinal effective permeability ( P eff ) was calculated according to a parallel tube model. $$ {\mathrm{P}}_{\mathrm{eff},\mathrm{rat}}=-\mathrm{Q}\cdot \ln \left({\mathrm{C}}_{\mathrm{out}}/{\mathrm{C}}_{\mathrm{in}}\right)/60\cdot 2\uppi \mathrm{rl} $$ where Q is the perfusion rate (0.2 mL/min), r is the radius of the intestinal segment (0.18 cm), l is the length of the intestinal segment (10 cm) and C in and C out are the inlet and outlet solute concentrations, respectively.
Pharmacokinetic Studies
Female Wistar rats weighing 190 ± 20 g were used for kinetic studies. All experiments were conducted according to the Guidelines for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. The protocol was approved by the institutional animal ethical committee with number NIP/5/2016/PE/186. All the rats were grouped into two, each with five animals and were kept on overnight fasting prior to the day of experiment. Equivalent dose (20 mg/kg) of pure drug (PD) suspended in 0.5% CMC and optimised nanosuspensions were orally administered to rats. Blood samples (0.5 mL) from each animal were collected in EDTA tubes at respective intervals of 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12 and 24 h. All blood samples were immediately centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 10 min to separate the plasma and stored at −20°C until analysis. The samples were analysed as per the bioanalytical method developed earlier. The pharmacokinetic parameters including C max , t max and AUC 0–24 h were calculated. All the results are represented in mean ± SD.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
NRG Nanosuspension Preparation and Stabilisation
In the present study, nanosuspensions were prepared using sonoprecipitation method which involves the addition of organic solution containing drug into antisolvent with stabiliser. This resulted in rapid precipitation of drug due to desolvation by producing nano-sized drug particles. The process follows the Ostwald–Mier theory, according to which crystallisation starts on reaching supersaturation stage, followed by nucleation and crystal growth. On adding saturated drug organic solution into antisolvent, supersaturation takes place, with evaporation of solvent leading to the formation of large number of nuclei, and crystal growth continues. This process of nanoprecipitation involves critical variables such as selection of solvent, antisolvent and stabiliser.
As per preliminary trials, acetone and ethanol were used as organic solvents (S) depending on maximum ability to solubilise the drug. Triple distilled water was taken as antisolvent (AS) depending on low solubility of drug and miscibility with most of the solvents making it an appropriate antisolvent. The nanosuspensions prepared using acetone as organic solvent showed aggregation and non-uniformity in terms of high particle size and poor size distribution similar to previously reported studies ( ). The reason could be due to the effect of solvent in stabilising the nanosuspensions by controlling the number of crystal nuclei formed ( ). The nanosuspensions prepared using ethanol as organic solvent resulted in less particle size with uniform distribution on evaporation of solvent. Hence, ethanol was used as solvent of choice for further preparation of formulations. Initial trials for nanosuspensions using magnetic stirring and high-speed homogenisation resulted in non-uniform formulations with visible settling within a few hours due to aggregation of particles. This could be due to mechanical agitation and non-uniform mixing producing local regions of supersaturation during antisolvent precipitation ( ). Hence, ultrasound energy was used for stabilising the system since application of ultrasound results in increasing mass transfer and diffusion though the process with decreased solubility and rapid supersaturation for nucleation and crystal growth ( ).
Water-soluble polymers can contribute to drug supersaturation by inhibiting nucleation and crystal growth. These can absorb on the newly formed crystal surface and prevents further growth though electrostatic or stearic stabilisation ( ). Selection of suitable polymer at perfect stabilising concentration for covering the drug surface is the key factor behind preparing stable nanosuspensions. After screening various surfactants and polymeric stabilisers ( supplementary data ), PVP K-90, T80 and HPMC E5 were chosen. These were screened at different concentrations (0.15, 0.25, 0.5 and 1.0% w / v ) and their effect on average particle size was observed to select the stabiliser at an appropriate concentration. The results of the same are plotted and shown in Table I .
The results revealed that particle size increased in the order of T80 > HPMC E5 > PVP K-90. Using Tween 80 as a stabiliser at different concentrations produced high mean particle size when compared to polymeric stabilisers (Fig. 2 ). The average particle size of nanosuspensions prepared using T80 was highest in the range of 1021.9 to 1986.5 nm. This suggests that stearic stabilisation by water-soluble polymers such as HPMC E5 and PVP K-90 plays a major role in stabilisation of the selected drug when compared to non-ionic surfactants, which lead to the formation of large crystals that can be attributed to a small number of crystal nuclei and low supersaturated state. The oxyethylene blocks of T80 resulted in significant solubility enhancement of drug below the critical micelle concentration (CMC). After the enhancement, it could actually result in less surfactant adsorption which would further destabilise the nanosuspensions and thereby contribute to increased particle size ( ). HPMC E5 is a polymer with a number of methoxyl and hydroxypropyl groups with high affinity for hydrophobic portion with an ability to form hydrogen bonding with drug. The formulations prepared by HPMC E5 reduced the particle size ranging from 814 to 1107.5 nm but lead to more aggregation and visible settling of particles. The reason is attributed to the fact that HPMC E5 imparts more viscosity to the system which could hinder the process of formation of particles ( ). The formulations prepared with PVP K-90 are more homogenous and transparent than HPMC E5 as well as T80 with mean particle ranging from 85.51 to 221.6 nm. Sufficient hydrophobicity of PVP K-90 provides the required surface energy to stabilise hydrophobic drug surfaces ( ). In the present study, PVP K-90 was found to be a suitable polymer for stabilising surface of newly formed particles. Low concentrations of PVP K-90 (0.15–0.25% w / v ) produced large particle size range due to the fact that insufficient amount of surfactant may be present to cover the hydrophobic drug surface ( ). However, when used in high concentration (1% w / v ), it resulted again in increased particle size which can be attributed to thick coating by polymer which inhibits diffusion between the solvent and the antisolvent during precipitation. Therefore, PVP concentration of 0.5% w / v with lowest size was selected for this study. Fig. 2 Effect of different concentrations of stabiliser on particle size of nanosuspensions
Effect of Drug Concentration and Sonication Time
The effect of drug concentration and time length of sonication on particle size of nanosuspensions was observed, and the results are shown in Fig. 3 . When drug concentration in organic solvent was changed from 10 to 30 mg/mL, an initial decrease in particle size from 170.9 ± 26.37 nm to 82.36 ± 18.32 nm was observed. However, when the drug concentration was increased to 50 mg/mL, an increase in particle size 124.75 ± 14.07 nm was noticed with turbidity ascribed to greater supersaturation and crystal size ( ). A major challenge in the process of nanosuspensions is controlling the size of newly formed particles though controlled nuclei formation with decreased growth rate ( ). Drug supersaturation plays a role in controlling crystal size ( ). The study suggests that not only good combination of stabiliser and solvent antisolvent system but suitable drug concentration can also control particle size. Fig. 3 a Effect of drug concentration and b time length of sonication on nanosuspended system
The effect of sonication time applied (5, 8, 10 and 15 min) on particle size was observed. It was observed that on increasing the sonication time, the size of the NRG-NS showed initial decrease at 8 min (117.5 ± 0.77 nm). Further application of sonication time to 10 min resulted in size increment (122.75 ± 0.77 nm) and 15 min (164.9 ± 0.21 nm). Ultrasonication in preparation of nanosuspensions is aimed at controlling particle growth through increased mass transfer and diffusion coefficient leading to high supersaturation rate by reducing the metastable zone width ( ). Taking these observations into consideration, processing conditions of 8 min sonication and 50% amplitude at 750 W power under ice-cold conditions were fixed.
Optimising single factor at a time, different formulation and process conditions were fixed. Briefly, 1 mL of 30 mg/mL NRG organic solution was quickly injected into 10 mL of 0.5% w / v of PVP K-90 distilled water solution under rapid magnetic stirring at 1000 rpm for 5 min followed by treatment with ultrasonication at 750 W for 8 min with 5 s on/off under ice-cold conditions and kept on magnetic stirring for evaporation of the solvent as mentioned earlier in preparation procedure.
Characterisation of Nanosuspensions
Particle Size Distribution and Zeta Potential
Particle size, PDI, and zeta potential of optimised nanosuspension was observed immediately after dilution (1:10) with distilled water using a Malvern zeta sizer. The same is shown in Fig. of the supplementary file . The average particle size was 117.0 ± 5 nm with PDI of 0.153. Since the PDI of prepared formulation was below 0.3, uniform particle size distribution and homogeneity of nanosuspensions were ensured. Determination of zeta potential (property related to the double electric layer on the surface of colloidal particles) provides an idea about the physical stability of nanosuspensions ( ). The optimised formulation had zeta potential of −14.6 ± 5.6 mV. The surface charge on particles may arise due to ionisation of particle surface or adsorption of surfactant contributing to stabilisation of the nanosuspension ( ).
DSC
DSC analysis of pure drug, PVP K-90, physical mixture and optimised nanosuspensions are shown in Fig. 4 . The pure drug showed a sharp endothermic peak at 258°C (corresponding to melting point of the drug) while PVP K-90 exhibited broad endothermal peak at 85°C. The physical mixture showed the presence of both peaks, but with a shift in drug peak from 258 to 230°C, and this may be due to drug–polymer interaction. However, optimised nanosuspensions (without cryoprotectant) did not show any endothermic peak corresponding to the drug which indicated probable conversion of the drug into amorphous form [ ], while polymer peak was found at its melting point. To further confirm the physical state, XRD studies were preceded by DSC. Fig. 4 DSC thermograms: a pure drug, b PVP K-90, c physical mixture (PM), d optimised formulation
XRD
Figure 5 shows the recorded XRD patterns of pure drug, PVP K-90, physical mixture and optimised nanosuspensions. The pure drug showed sharp, high intensity diffraction peaks at 2 θ values of 10.60°, 11.24°, 15.56°, 17.01°, 21.12°, 22.07°, 23.54° and 27.54° in accordance with previous reports ( ) indicating the inherent crystalline nature of the drug. The stabiliser PVP K-90 has shown a diffused halo pattern dictating amorphous nature. In physical mixture, characteristic peaks of both drug and polymer remained intact with a mild change in the intensity. Optimised nanosuspensions showed diffused, broad peaks with very low intensity of characteristic peaks of drug indicating conversion of crystalline to amorphous form; this may be due to processing under sonoprecipitation, as reported by earlier researchers ( ). Fig. 5 X-ray diffraction patterns of a pure drug, b formulation, c PVP K-90, d physical mixture
FTIR
FTIR of pure drug, PVP K-90, physical mixture, optimised nanosuspensions and lyophilised product was done to investigate any interaction that could occur among various components. The observed peaks and corresponding shifts are shown in Fig. 6 and Table S1 of the supplementary data . Shift of free hydroxyl group (–OH) of the drug from 3293 to 3447 cm −1 and carbonyl (–C=O) from 1630 to 1641 cm −1 in nanosuspensions suggested physicochemical interaction between polymer and drug. The reason is formation of hydrogen bonds between –OH group of drug and –C=O of PVP K-90 ( ). Fig. 6 FTIR spectra of a PVP K-90, b pure drug, c freeze-dried nanosuspension, d nanosuspension, e physical mixture
SEM
Surface images of pure drug, precipitated drug from ethanol water without sonication, optimised formulation (sonicated) and lyophilised nanosuspensions (without cryoprotectant) were carried out using SEM (Fig. 7 ). The pure drug has an irregular cubic shape with average particle size range of 6–28 μm. However, the drug precipitated from ethanol water system showed needle-type crystals, while precipitation under sonication converted it into spherical particles with uniform size range in nanometres (90–200 nm). The lyophilised formulation had a flaky appearance. The study showed the effect of nanosizing on particles upon precipitation form antisolvent for their shape, size and morphology change. Fig. 7 SEM photographs of a pure drug, b drug precipitated from ethanol water system, c optimised nanosuspensions after air drying, d lyophilised formulation (without cryoprotectant)
Stability Studies
Stability studies of NRG nanosuspensions were investigated at three different temperature conditions for 30 days at particular intervals (0, 5th, 15th and 30th day) and the effect of stability conditions on particle size was studied and data given in Fig. 8 . The particle size did not show much difference up to the 15th day at various stability conditions. Storage at refrigerated settings (4–8°C) increased the particle size from 119.5 ± 1.76 nm (15th day) to 137.25 ± 1.59 nm (30th day). At high temperature of 40°C, increase in size was observed on the 15th to 30th day from 125.29 ± 3.30 to 169.8 ± 1.55 which may be due to loss in integrity of polymeric stabilisation with time. The reduced surface coverage would in turn result in an increase in particle size due to Ostwald ripening ( ). All the formulations remained transparent during this period on reconstitution except precipitation in vial stored for 30 days at room temperature. Fig. 8 Particle size (nm) of lyophilised formulations kept at different storage conditions: a 40°C, b 4–8°C, c 28 ± 2°C ( n = 3)
Dissolution Studies
The dissolution profiles of pure NRG and nanosuspensions are shown in Fig. 9 . Phosphate buffer medium with pH 7.4 was used as dissolution media and sink conditions were maintained during the dissolution rate testing. NRG nanosuspensions have shown 91 ± 4.4% of drug release at 60 min when compared to pure drug release of 42 ± 4.1%. The higher dissolution rate for the nanosuspensions compared to the pure drug can be explained by the Noyes–Whitney equation. According to the equation, the dissolution rate of a drug can be increased by reduced particle size and enhanced surface area [ ]. The particle size, shape, state (amorphous or crystalline) and habit (needle or spherical) are some of the physical parameters majorly controlling the solubility and dissolution rate of a drug in physiological conditions. The present study deals with micron-sized, crystalline drug with low solubility. In this context, dissolution enhancement by nanosuspensions could be due to (a) conversion to amorphous nature (depicted by DSC and XRD), (b) hydrogen bond formation between drug and PVP molecules (FTIR confirmation), (c) particle size reduction from micron to nanometre range (size measurements) and (d) morphology of particles (SEM determination). All these factors cumulate to increase the solubility and dissolution profile of selected drug under study ( ). Fig. 9 In vitro dissolution profile of pure drug and optimised nanosuspensions in phosphate buffer saline pH 7.4
In Vitro Non-Everted Intestinal Gut Sac Method
The drug permeation across different intestinal parts [duodenum, ileum and jejunum (proximal part)] was measured by estimating the concentration of drug released and at the same is plotted against time points as shown in Fig. of the supplementary file . The absorption of drug in nanosuspension was enhanced compared to pure drug. Maximum absorption occurs in lower parts of the intestine compared to duodenum. From the graph, permeability coefficients of nanosuspension and pure drug were calculated and the mean apparent permeability ( P app ) from pure drug in different segments was 0.69 × 10 −4 cm/s in duodenum, 0.20 × 10 −4 cm/s in ileum and 0.70 × 10 −4 cm/s in jejunum and from formulation was found to be 0.90 × 10 −4 cm/s in duodenum, 0.96 × 10 −4 cm/s in ileum and 0.910 × 10 −4 cm/s in jejunum. Compared to pure drug, formulation had shown enhanced apparent permeability with 1.5-, 1.37- and 4-fold enhancement in duodenum, jejunum and ileum, respectively. Apart from various in vitro methods, non-everted sac model can be used to determine the permeability of natural compounds across the rat intestine and can predict human absorption in vivo ( ). Results from the present study suggest that the drug delivery in the form of nanoparticles can enhance the mucosal permeability though reduction in particle size leading to increased permeation of the drug particles and eventually improving the absorption of the drug throughout the intestine ( ).
In Situ Single Pass Intestinal Perfusion (SPIP) Method
Most of the natural compounds fail to show the in vivo activity in spite of their good in vitro results due to reasons like poor absorption, water insolubility and physical instability. Intestinal mucosa forms the major barrier for controlling the process of absorption. In this context, we conducted the SPIP studies for determining formulation efficiency in intact rat model. Intestinal permeability of the pure drug and optimised NS was determined in rat (ileum segment) using single pass intestinal perfusion technique. Effective permeability ( P eff ) values were calculated from the steady-state drug concentrations in the perfusate collected from the outlet. Results showed that there is an increase in effective permeability of naringenin from 0.09 ± 0.002 × 10 −4 cm/s to 0.4 ± 0.07 × 10 −4 cm/s. The main advantage of in situ SPIP technique is integral physiological conditions in experimental animals. This method helps in predicting intestinal absorption in humans. Intestinal permeability relates the ability of a compound to move across the epithelial barrier of the intestine and represents a direct measurement of the local absorption rate and reflects the transport velocity across the epithelial barrier, expressed in centimetres per second. Our results predict that drug delivery ( ) in nanosuspensions increased the intestinal permeability due to reasons like reduced particle size, increased surface area, increased solubility and better dissolution.
Pharmacokinetic Studies
The concentration of naringenin in plasma was measured after oral administration of the pure drug suspended in 0.5% w / v CMC and optimised nanosuspensions in Wistar rats. The plasma concentration–time profile and pharmacokinetic parameters are shown in Fig. 10 and Table II , respectively. The concentration maximum ( C max ) and area under curve (AUC 0–24 h ) of nano-formulation showed approximately 2-fold and 1.8-fold increase than the pure drug. As the drug belongs to Biopharmaceutics Classification System class II with limited solubility, an increased dissolution rate via nanosuspensions helped in achieving high C max compared to the pure drug. The improved bioavailability of drug can be attributed to various factors. First is the particle size reduction with increased surface area as a result of nanosizing. Second is reduction in diffusion layer thickness and increased adhesion surface area between nanoparticles and intestinal epithelium of villi which provides a direct contact between the surface. Third, immediate release of drug makes it more available at absorption site ( ). Fig. 10 Plasma concentration profile after oral administration of nanosuspensions and pure drug Table II Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Pure Drug and Nanosuspensions after Oral Administration ( n = 3) Sample number Pharmacokinetic parameter Pure drug (pd) Nanosuspensions (for) 1 C max (ng/mL) 728.805 ± 75.88 1546.811 ± 89.54 2 AUC 0–24 h (ng h/mL) 662.819 ± 510.23 1015.710 ± 607.89 3 t max (h) 2 ± 0.05 1.8 ± 0.02
CONCLUSION
The present study projected a successful novel formulation of poorly water-soluble flavanoid naringenin as nanosuspensions using antisolvent precipitation method. The particle size of nanosuspensions was highly dependent on the process and formulation parameters. The optimised formulation with PVP K-90 (0.5% w / v ) gave particle size and PDI of 117 nm and 0.153 respectively. The nanoparticles were in amorphous state as characterised by DSC and confirmed though XRD techniques. The cubic irregular micro-ranged shape transformed into spherical nanoparticles upon sonoprecipitation as shown in SEM images. The percentage of drug release from NRG nanosuspensions markedly increased due to the amorphous nature and reduced size of particles as compared to the pure drug. The in vitro and in vivo studies revealed enhanced permeation across intestinal mucosa for nanosuspensions compared to the pure drug. The in vivo pharmacokinetics demonstrated that C max and AUC 0–24 h value of nanosuspension was approximately 2- and 1.8-fold greater than the pure drug. The study revealed that nanosuspensions of naringenin can be a rapid, inexpensive and better approach to increase the dissolution and, hence, bioavailability in vivo. Further studies can be carried out for the application of a similar approach to other poorly soluble flavanones.