INTRODUCTION
Orally inhaled products (OIPs) are usually supplied with a mouthpiece. However, many sub-populations of patients are unable to use this interface primarily because of age, in the case of infants, toddlers, and some older adults with infirmity requiring this interface, and also because of age-independent limitations associated with impairment to cognitive ability and/or manual dexterity. The facemask has been developed as the alternative interface for such users. Several different sizes are typically made available by manufacturers of OIPs requiring this interface, in order to accommodate age-related growth of the face ( ). Facemasks are most frequently supplied with nebulizing systems ( , ). However, this form of patient interface is also widely encountered with press-and-breathe pressurized metered-dose inhalers (pMDIs), where an add-on device (spacer or valved holding chamber (VHC)) is needed to improve medication delivery for the user who has difficulty coordinating inhaler actuation with the onset of inhalation ( ). It is recognized that the facemask itself can have an important influence on the efficiency of aerosol transport from the inhaler to the patient ( , , , ). Evaluation of the inhaler-facemask combinations in the laboratory is therefore an important component in the overall assessment of in vitro performance, especially where it is desired to predict likely function in patient use ( ).
The assessment of an OIP-facemask in the laboratory is a more complex process compared with the situation that exists when a mouthpiece is the patient interface. A straightforward in-line connector containing a minimal internal surface for particle deposition is all that is needed to link the mouthpiece of a device-on-test to the aerosol measurement apparatus. A Canadian standard developed in 2002, and subsequently in widespread use for the evaluation of spacers/VHCs, recommended removal of the facemask to make the link between facemask attachment and the measurement apparatus similar to that of an in-line connector, because of the (at that time) lack of face models that would enable the facemask interface to be more appropriately evaluated ( ). This situation, although understandable, is unsatisfactory, since without the facemask present, the ability to evaluate the effect of the dead space between facemask and face on medication delivery to the patient is absent. Furthermore, the means to determine the magnitude of lost medication arising from particle deposition on the interior surfaces of the facemask and facial surface within the facemask is also missing. The magnitude of this dead space is an important variable to minimize, especially in devices delivering inhaled medications to infants or small children, whose tidal volumes are relatively small compared with those of adults ( , ). Such tidal volumes can be comparable or even smaller than the internal volume of the spacer/VHC. Furthermore, an evaluation cannot be made of potentially severe losses of medication arising as the result of ambient air ingress via gaps created inadvertently around the periphery of the facemask, where it makes contact with the facial tissues ( ). There is no further energy source to drive the aerosol towards the patient under positive pressure after the pMDI-propellant flash evaporation has taken place. Hence, leakage of ambient air inwards to the space enclosed by the facemask can greatly dilute the aerosol as it passes from the exit of the spacer/VHC to the mouth or nasal passageway when the patient inhales ( ). In extreme cases where a VHC is in use, there could be enough leakage that the inhalation valve may fail to open, because there is insufficient suction force transmitted to the valve by the patient when inhaling.
Nebulizing systems are the only other currently available class of OIP where a facemask is likely to be encountered. However, here, there is less concern about achieving a leak-tight connection between facemask and face in situations in which the droplet stream is created by a supply of compressed gas (air, oxygen, or a helium-oxygen mixture) to the nebulizer. The positive pressure associated with the support gas ensures that aerosol still reaches the patient even though some of the droplets may escape outwards to the ambient surroundings via such leak pathways ( ). In contrast, nebulizers with a facemask that operate by means of a vibrating mesh or membrane rather than using a compressed gas source to generate the droplet aerosol for inhalation may encounter problems similar to those described for pMDI-generated aerosols, since they rely only on the inhalation of the patient to transport the droplets from the generator via a facemask to the lips or nose.
The face models described in this article were developed primarily for laboratory testing in which the therapeutic medication could be either pMDI-spacer/VHC or nebulizer-generated. However, the focus in this article is on their use for the in vitro assessment of performance of VHCs, given the additional stringency associated with ambient air ingress prevention at the facemask-face seal with this mode of inhaled medication delivery.
RATIONALE FOR THE AEROSOL DELIVERY TO AN ANATOMIC (ADAM) MODEL
In an update published in 2008 to the aforementioned Canadian spacer/VHC standard, it was acknowledged there had been significant improvements in both facemask design and testing methods since the original version of the standard had been published ( ). The revised standard therefore modified the original recommendation to the effect that laboratory testing of the spacer/VHC be carried out with the facemask in place in cases where an exhalation valve is present in the facemask. However, it was acknowledged that whilst mannequins are available from suppliers or can be constructed with realistic facial geometries, the methodology had not yet advanced to the point at which normative guidance on testing procedures could be provided. This update therefore highlighted the need for a suite of age-appropriate face models to be created that could be used to form the connection between inhaler and measurement apparatus in as a realistic manner as possible.
At about the same time, Mitchell reviewed the state of the art concerning the development of face models for the laboratory evaluation of OIP-facemask combinations ( ). He commented that the first generation of widely available face models had been developed from basic simulations of the facemask dead space involving the imposition of a rigid cylindrical volume between inhaler and measurement apparatus, towards the adoption of face models to which the facemask could be applied with a known force. This improvement in technique achieves a closer realization of the actual dead space configuration when used with a patient ( ). He further commented that the first generation of face models made widely available had been developed using rigid polymeric materials. For example, the SAINT infant face model developed by a group at the Sophia Children’s Hospital/Erasmus Medical Center in the Netherlands in the early 2000s ( ), and in widespread use since, had been created in a rigid polymer by a 3D printing technique. Simulation of the mechanical responsiveness of the soft tissues of the face to the application of the facemask could therefore not be undertaken with such a model. Furthermore, this face lacked modeling in the critical region above the bridge of the nose, where the leakage between the facemask and face is known to be a likely occurrence ( ).
Shah et al. subsequently undertook a laboratory study exploring the effect of fit-to-face upon flexible facemask-face dead space. They showed that the volume enclosed by the facemask, through which the inhaled medication must pass from the spacer/VHC to the patient airway, could be greatly influenced by the amount of force applied to the facemask ( ). Flexible facemasks are now in widespread use because conformation of the facemask periphery, when applied to the contours of the face with the minimum force to preserve patient comfort, is known to be critical to the mitigation of potential pathways for ambient air ingress ( ). Everard has commented that facemask flexibility is also especially important with very young patients ( ). However, recently, Carrigy et al. suggested that flexible facemask testing could be undertaken with a rigid face model by applying a sealant between facemask periphery and face model ( ). Although preventing leakage of ambient air into the enclosed space between facemask and face, such a precaution may not enable the true volume in clinical use to be realized in the laboratory. Such an outcome may happen because the sealant does not allow the facemask to conform to fit the face in the way it would have done, had no sealant been present. In summary, it is apparent that there is still a necessity for age-appropriate face models incorporating soft tissue realization that can be used to simulate more realistically the volume of the enclosed space between facemask and face.
The Aerosol Delivery to an Anatomic Model (ADAM) concept was developed at Trudell Medical International (TMI, London, Canada) in response to these needs. Initial attempts at creating a realistic infant face model simulated soft tissue in the vicinity of the mouth and cheeks of an oral-breathing 12-month-old Caucasian infant face ( ). An opening was constructed in the cavity immediately behind the lips of the model to contain a filter that captured the aerosol from the VHC. This first-generation infant face model was coupled to a breathing simulator set to mimic an age-appropriate breathing pattern for the quantification of emitted mass ex spacer/VHC. However, infants are often obligate nasal breathers ( ). Furthermore, the model lacked an anatomically correct upper airway, restricting its use to the evaluation of the emitted mass of medication at the facemask, rather than the mass potentially available for deposition in the lungs. The ability to predict lung deposition of active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) is highly desirable in order to quantify the likelihood of potential therapeutic benefit ( ).
Given these significant limitations, the following goals for the next generation of ADAM face models were established: 1. Create movement of the soft tissue of the face coming into contact with the facemask that is as realistic as possible, thereby defining the in-use dead space more precisely than is possible with models having rigid facial surfaces; 2. Incorporate an anatomically appropriate upper airway to permit measurements of delivered drug mass to be made at a location approximately equivalent to that of the carina, thereby providing an indicative measure of total lung deposited dose; 3. Extend the concept to provide models representing a 4-year-old small child and an adult of indeterminate age; 4. Provide an adult oropharyngeal airway equivalent to that used in conjunction with the adult face model with an interface modeling the lips at the entrance to the airway to enable VHC-mouthpiece variants that are in widespread use ( ) to be evaluated.
The present article describes the development of these second-generation ADAM models. It also presents their initial evaluation in the laboratory using age-appropriate VHC-facemask devices as the representative method for pMDI delivery of hydrofluoroalkane (HFA)-salbutamol, chosen because this medication is a widely prescribed short-acting beta-2 agonist bronchodilator prescribed for patients of all ages.
THE SECOND-GENERATION ADAM MODELS
The development of each model is presented in chronological sequence, since there has been, and continues to be, ongoing development of the techniques related to their construction. These developments have taken place as improved materials have become available and also as new applications for testing OIP-facemask combinations have come to light. The information provided herein therefore serves to summarize the current status with the models whose design has been fixed. Priority was initially given to the development of face models that would enable inhaler-facemask combinations to be evaluated with three major age categories of patient: infant, small child, and adult. However, the concept has more recently been extended to the development of an adult oropharyngeal model with a short adapter at its entry, intended to accept a mouthpiece. This fixture has been found to be useful for the evaluation of spacer/VHCs with a mouthpiece as the patient interface.
The polymers from which all the models were made were chosen to provide chemical resistance to reagents often encountered for recovery of API(s) following testing, specifically methanol (100% v / v ), hydrochloric acid (0.1 M), and sodium hydroxide (0.1 M). They were also designed to be superficially scratch-resistant and tolerant of minor impact forces in use.
Support Fixture and Carriage for the Spacer/VHC-Facemask on Test
It was apparent from the beginning of the development of the face models that a cradle-on-carriage arrangement would be needed to enable both the facemask of the spacer and VHC-facemask-on-test to be aligned correctly with the model face and applied to it with a well-defined and repeatable force within the range of likely clinical practice. Shah et al. ( ) defined this range as being from 6.7 to 31 N (0.7 to 3.2 kg) applied force. The system that was developed is illustrated in Fig. 1 . The model is clamped securely to a support structure that allows the adjustment of the face in the vertical plane with respect to the horizontal carriage upon which the inhaler with facemask is secured. The illustration also shows two wrap-around clamps with Velcro straps at either end of a VHC body to hold the barrel of the add-on device in place. The face model can also be rotated up or down in the vertical direction within an overall range of ±30° from the horizontal position, so that the facemask contact surface can be aligned at a realistic angle with the face, for example to simulate use by a caregiver. The facial angle indicator is visible outside the support clamp to the left-hand side of the model face in Fig. 1 . Although the cradle for the inhaler was manufactured in aluminum, the Velcro supports act as electrical insulators so that any electrostatic charge acquired by the device does not drain to ground and neither can the fixture impart charge to the device. This feature was seen to be important particularly for the evaluation of non-electric charge-conducting spacers/VHCs, as their performance is highly susceptible to acquired electrostatic charge ( ). In contrast, those devices either manufactured from charge dissipative/electrically conducting materials ( ) or pre-washed with ionic detergent and drip-dried in air before evaluation ( ) are less affected. Regardless, this feature enables all types of add-on device to be evaluated without concern for charge transfer-related effects. Fig. 1 Support cradle showing horizontal carriage supporting a VHC as the “inhaler-on-test” as well as the angle adjustment at the top of the illustration that aligns the face realistically with the facemask; an aerosol filter is also shown located beneath the infant face model at the distal end of its nasopharyngeal airway
Infant Model
The infant ADAM face model was the first in the series to be developed. The age range of the model was fixed to be within 6 and 9 months old. The concept was initially developed to utilize a silicone elastomer having a Shore hardness in the range 30–50 as the compound to form the softer facial tissues coming into contact with the facemask ( , ). These surfaces were observed to deform slightly (a few tenths of a millimeter) in response to a light push from an applied finger. An attempt was also made to replicate the superficial skin surface more closely by using a polyurethane-based compound (Skin-Flex; BJB Enterprises, Tustin, CA, USA). However, during the deposit recovery procedure, the replica skin coating was found to leach chemical species into the solvents used to recover the API(s) associated with particles that deposited on the surfaces of the face located within the facemask. Furthermore, these unidentified compounds interfered with the assay methods used for API recovery. Significantly, the coating discolored after a few weeks, becoming tacky to the touch. Stickiness is not representative of the patient’s normal skin condition ( ). Skin replication using Skin-Flex for this and future models in the series was abandoned, given these drawbacks, and current versions of all these faces are now constructed in a low-viscosity silicone polymer. Volunteers evaluated at TMI had facial soft tissue hardness values up to 27, so that the product having a Shore hardness of 30 (Ecoflex ® Product 00-30; Smooth-On, Inc., Macungie, PA, USA) was chosen as being closest to the real-life situation. Importantly, the grade of silicone polymer used enabled quantitative recovery of a wide variety of different APIs comprising currently marketed products to be achieved, without detectable interference from leachable contaminants.
Clinical evidence for the predominance of preferential nasal breathing associated with infants ( ) resulted in the decision to incorporate an anatomically correct nasopharyngeal upper airway into the face model. This upper airway (external view shown in Fig. 2 ) was reconstructed using 3D stereolithography from a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of a 7-month-old nasal-breathing infant obtained originally at the University of Alberta, Edmonton ( ). Rudimentary realization of the underlying firm bony structure of the face using a sintered nylon polymer was also incorporated at this stage (Fig. 3 a). This feature both provided support for the simulated soft tissue and enabled the entry to the cast of the infant nasopharynx to be correctly aligned with the nares with the exit emerging on the axis in the vertical plane from the neck at the base of the model ( ). The overall appearance of the finished face model is illustrated in frontal and side views in Fig. 3 b, c, respectively. Fig. 2 External view of anatomically correct nasopharynx of a 7-month-old infant whose internal geometry was determined by a CT scanning technique ( ); this upper airway was used in the ADAM infant model Fig. 3 ADAM infant face model. a Rudimentary firm tissue modeling to support the ADAM infant face and align the nasopharyngeal airway. b Front view showing facial profile. c Side view showing the underlying support for the soft facial tissues
Small Child Model
A decision was taken at the time that the small child model was developed to acquire the data for both the facial and skull structures as well as the upper airway from MRI. These data were obtained under an agreement with a local center of excellence (Robarts Research Institute of Western University (formerly University of Western Ontario), London, Canada). This organization undertakes such high-resolution imaging for a variety of medical purposes. The selected images that were used to develop the model were obtained from a 4-year-old volunteer child with open oral (teeth present) and nasopharyngeal airways ( ) (Fig. 4 a), having the underlying rigid structure depicted in Fig. 4 b. The model airway was constructed from the imaging data by 3D stereolithography at TMI, and the realization of the underlying bony structure was executed in rigid polymer resin by a procedure described previously for the infant model. The soft facial tissues were constructed without a skin-like surface from the same silicone elastomer as was used with the infant model ( ). Figure 5 a is a front view of the model face, and Fig. 5 b is a side view showing the model mounted on its support for inhaler testing. The long axis of a VHC-child facemask is shown mounted horizontally on the previously described carriageway, with the facemask approximately perpendicular to the face with the apex of the facemask positioned such that the curved lip of the mask is located where the bridge of the nose merges with the face. This model was subsequently evaluated with both oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal passageways left open. Fig. 4 ADAM 4-year-old child model. a MRI image of the upper airway showing patent nasal passages and oral passage. b Front view of the model showing underlying facial shape and structure Fig. 5 ADAM-III 4-year-old child model. a Front view. b Model-on-test fixture with VHC-child (medium) facemask on the carriageway fitted to the face
Adult Models
The imaging data for the facial and skull structure as well as the upper airway were also acquired by MRI, following a similar process to that described for the small child model (Fig. 6 a). The underlying rigid structure is depicted in side and front views in Fig. 6 b, c, respectively. Adults normally breathe medications via a facemask through the mouth, as medication delivery to the lungs is considered more efficient than if inhaled via the nasopharynx ( ). Fig. 6 ADAM adult model. a MRI image of the oropharyngeal airway. b Side view of underlying facial shape and structure. c Front view showing similar information to b
This model was therefore constructed with an anatomically accurate oropharynx, including the teeth. The formation of the facial profile together with its underlying bone structure was again executed in rigid polymer resin by a procedure described previously for the infant model. The soft facial tissues were constructed from the same silicone elastomer as used for the infant and child models. The overall appearance of the finished face model is illustrated in frontal view in Fig. 7 a, where the same model is shown positioned on its support fixture with an adult VHC-facemask fitted to the face and located on the same carriageway as used with the infant and small child models in Fig. 7 b. Fig. 7 The completed ADAM adult model for VHC-facemask testing. a Front view showing facial profile. b On-test fixture with a VHC-adult (large) facemask fitted to the face
A second adult model incorporating the same oropharynx as shown in Fig. 7 a, but with a short extension mimicking the lips, was also developed for the purpose of evaluating VHC-mouthpiece combinations. A side view of this model is shown in Fig. 8 in conjunction with one of the adult VHC-mouthpiece devices that were used for its evaluation. Fig. 8 Side view of the ADAM adult oropharynx-lips model for VHC-mouthpiece testing
EVALUATION OF MODELS
The evaluation of the ADAM face models took place within a period spanning several years, as each model was developed. The order in which each model was realized was based on the need to support the development of VHC products serving the various sub-populations of patients stratified by age. There was therefore no single experiment undertaken to qualify all the models at one time. Nevertheless, after its development, each model was evaluated with the same API (HFA-albuterol (salbutamol) sulfate), delivered via a patient age-appropriate device chosen from the anti-static AeroChamber Plus ® VHC with the Flow-Vu ® inspiratory flow indicator (IFI) family (Trudell Medical International, London, Canada). Each device was equipped with the appropriate sized facemask for use with the model under investigation. The detailed procedures are described by a face model type.
It is important to note that these experiments were not intended to be formal validation studies, since there were (and still are) no models representing norms in terms of facial profile and oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway dimensions, against which to compare the data. However, the measurements taken with each model were compared with estimates of lung delivery from the few clinical studies discovered in which the same drug product was delivered to patients with ages close to the simulated age of the model under evaluation. The purpose of these comparisons was to establish if each model was capable of providing realistic outcomes in terms of the primary metric, delivered mass distal to the airway (DM carina ). This measure was taken as representing the magnitude of the likely delivery of medication to the carinal region of the respiratory tract, and therefore potentially available for onward transport through the airways of the lungs.
Infant Model
Materials and Methods
The infant face model was initially evaluated in conjunction with the 149-mL infant AeroChamber Plus ® VHC with infant/small (ComfortSeal ® ) facemask, manufactured from a soft silicone polymer ( ). The mucosa in the nasopharynx was simulated by introducing sufficient (ca. 6 mL of Brij-35 polyoxyethylene lauryl ether surfactant) in methanol ((15% w / v ), with glycerol (5 g) added as a thickening agent) to achieve a uniform wetting of the airway surfaces. Methanol was allowed to fully evaporate before using the model, creating a layer that was estimated as being close to 100 μm in thickness, based on the exposed internal surface area of the upper airway, after determining the volume of surfactant added to the model.
The VHC-facemask was anchored to the carriageway with the Velcro straps and advanced manually so that the facemask was fitted to the face of the model with an applied force of 1.6 ± 0.1 kg. This force, verified by a gauge attached to the VHC-facemask, simulated the medium force adopted in the study by Shah et al. ( ). The absence of air ingress via leakage pathways at the facemask-to-face seal was subsequently verified by drawing a constant flow rate through the model and, at the same time, checking that the volumetric flow rate entering the VHC at its pMDI adapter port was at least 90% of that present at the exit of the model nasopharynx.
Tidal breathing was simulated using a test lung (ASL 5000; IngMar Medical, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) that was connected to the distal end of the model via a bacterial/viral filter where the aerosol particles were captured (Fig. 1 ). One hundred micrograms per actuation salbutamol (albuterol) base equivalent ex pMDI actuator valve (Ventolin ® -HFA; GSK plc, UK) was delivered to the device-on-test using the same inhaler ( n = 5 devices, 1 measurement per VHC). Twelve different tidal breathing patterns (all inspiratory/expiratory (I/E) ratio 1:3) were evaluated (Table I ), varying the tidal volume from 30 to 90 mL and respiratory rate from 15 to 35 breathing cycles/min at each tidal volume. Table I Infant Tidal Breathing Patterns with Fixed Inspiratory/Expiratory Ratio of 1:3 Used to Investigate VHC Performance with the ADAM Infant Model Tidal volume (mL) Respiratory rate (breaths/min) 30 15 25 35 50 70 90
Five separate actuations of a pre-shaken pMDI were delivered to the VHC-on-test, allowing six complete breathing cycles to elapse between each actuation (minimum of just over 10 s between actuations at the fastest respiratory rate of 35 breaths/min). Movement of the IFI was observed during each respiratory cycle, thus confirming that the seal between facemask and face had remained intact during the entire medication delivery process. The filter was subsequently removed from the distal end of the model, and the mass of salbutamol was determined by a validated HPLC-spectrophotometric technique. Salbutamol was also recovered from the pMDI actuator, on the exposed surfaces of the face, within the VHC and within the nasopharynx of the model so that the total mass recovery could be established as a further measurement validation.
In a parallel series of measurements ( ) using the same VHC-facemask configuration ( n = 5), a low-flow Marple-Miller cascade impactor ( ) operated without an induction port (i.e., the inlet to stage 1 was connected directly to the distal end of the airway of the model). This impactor was connected in turn to a vacuum source and operated at a constant flow rate of 4.9 L/min ± 5%, so that the fine particle fraction <4.7 μm aerodynamic diameter (FPF <4.7 μm ) of the aerosol could be determined at the location corresponding to the place at which values of DM carina were measured as previously described using the tidal breathing simulator. Simultaneous cascade impactor measurements with the inhaler operated by a breathing simulator were not attempted in order to keep the aerosol transport geometry as similar as possible for both measurement methods. Salbutamol recovery was undertaken from the collection cup of each stage of the cascade impactor. Subsequent assay to determine the mass of this API was undertaken by the same procedure as used for the breathing simulator-based measurements.
Results
In all instances, the total mass recovered was within ±20% of label claim (100 μg/actuation), and many measurements were much closer to this value, indicating that mass recovery of API had been effective. A small amount of medication (<5% label claim) is known to escape when the exhalation valve of the VHC opened, but the exact value was not determined in these studies, as the imposition of even a low-resistance collection filter downstream of the exhalation valve of the VHC-on-test would likely have interfered with the highly sensitive valve function.
FPF <4.7 μm was determined to be 99.5 ± 1.2% for the aerosol that reached the distal end of the nasopharynx by the cascade impaction procedure, confirming that the aerosol penetrating the upper airway to reach the collection filter for the measurements of DM carina comprised almost entirely fine particles. The disposition of drug mass from the inhaler to the filter at the distal end of the model nasopharynx for the breathing simulator-based measurements is summarized for each condition (Table II ). Values of DM carina were, in general, greater as tidal volume increased (Fig. 9 ), as the result of more rapid transport of the aerosol bolus from the VHC through the airway of the model per inspiration. These increases were associated with corresponding slight decreases in mass retained by the pMDI actuator and within the VHC that were statistically significant compared with the reference condition (50 mL tidal volume/25 breaths/min), only at the largest tidal volume and fastest breathing rates (90 mL and 25 or 30 breaths/min; one-way ANOVA for each measure, p < 0.05). Deposition in the model nasopharynx was close to zero, except at the largest tidal volume (90 mL), where 1.0 ± 0.5 μg/actuation deposited at the slowest breathing rate (15 cycles/min), increasing to 3.6 ± 1.4 μg/actuation at the highest breathing rate (35 cycles/min) investigated (Fig. 10 ). The deposited mass recovered from the face/nares of the model also increased with increasing tidal volume, from between 1 and 2 μg/actuation at 30 mL, but approaching 5 μg/actuation at 90 mL. Interestingly, although increases in breathing rate at each tidal volume had little effect on DM carina , compared with the influence of tidal volume, the mass retained in the airway increased significantly at the two highest tidal volumes (2.3 ± 1.3 and 3.6 ± 1.4 μg/actuation at 70 and 90 mL, respectively). These increases were of the same order as decreases in DM carina observed with these increases in tidal volume. In overall terms, the observed behavior is likely the outcome of the onset of enhanced inertial/turbulent deposition to the various components of the model at the greater instantaneous flow rates that were associated with the larger tidal volumes and faster breathing rates. Table II Disposition of Salbutamol Recovered from pMDI Actuator Mouthpiece, Within the AeroChamber Plus ® VHC Interior, on the Model Face and Infant Facemask Interior, in the Model Nasopharynx, and Delivered to the Filter Distal to the Airway of the Model (DM carina ) Tidal volume (mL) Breathing rate/min Mass salbutamol recovered (μg/pMDI actuation) (mean ± SD) pMDI actuator Within VHC Model face Model airway Filter (DM carina ) Mass recovered 30 15 28.1 ± 2.5 53.6 ± 3.1 1.2 ± 1.2 0.0 ± 0.0 0.3 ± 0.1 83.2 ± 2.9 25 28.9 ± 3.0 57.9 ± 2.5 1.1 ± 0.4 0.2 ± 0.1 1.3 ± 1.1 89.5 ± 5.4 35 28.2 ± 1.8 55.9 ± 3.5 1.7 ± 0.7 0.2 ± 0.1 1.2 ± 0.4 87.2 ± 5.0 50 15 30.2 ± 2.7 59.7 ± 4.2 0.7 ± 0.3 0.3 ± 0.2 2.1 ± 0.9 93.0 ± 6.6 25 25.4 ± 0.8 61.4 ± 2.1 1.2 ± 0.2 0.5 ± 0.3 4.2 ± 2.0 92.7 ± 1.9 35 26.9 ± 0.7 57.6 ± 3.7 1.9 ± 0.3 0.6 ± 0.4 3.4 ± 0.6 90.4 ± 4.1 70 15 27.1 ± 2.1 62.1 ± 1.6 2.8 ± 1.2 0.2 ± 0.1 4.3 ± 1.0 98.5 ± 5.7 25 28.1 ± 1.7 61.5 ± 5.6 2.8 ± 1.0 0.7 ± 0.3 3.5 ± 1.8 96.5 ± 8.1 35 29.0 ± 1.5 59.3 ± 4.7 4.7 ± 1.6 2.3 ± 1.3 4.9 ± 1.7 100.2 ± 5.1 90 15 26.5 ± 2.0 62.0 ± 1.9 4.7 ± 1.3 1.0 ± 0.5 9.4 ± 2.3 103.6 ± 2.4 25 21.6 ± 0.9 55.4 ± 2.0 4.8 ± 2.1 2.1 ± 0.6 7.7 ± 1.9 91.6 ± 1.9 35 21.3 ± 2.1 50.9 ± 3.0 3.6 ± 2.7 3.6 ± 1.4 6.7 ± 0.7 86.2 ± 5.3 n = 5 replicates/mean ± SD pMDI pressurized metered-dose inhaler, VHC valved holding chamber, DM carina delivered mass distal to the airway ( DM carina values are italicised to represent their significance in terms of predicting likely medication available for lung delivery) Fig. 9 DM carina for pMDI-delivered salbutamol from a VHC-infant facemask evaluated using the ADAM infant model and determined at different tidal breathing conditions with a fixed 25% duty cycle Fig. 10 Mass salbutamol/actuation recovered from the ADAM infant model nasopharynx, representing nasopharyngeal deposition, delivering the medication from a VHC-infant facemask; this measure was determined at different tidal breathing conditions with a fixed 25% duty cycle (inspiratory:expiratory ratio 1:3)
Comparison with Clinical Data
There are almost no clinical data upon which to base a comparison with the laboratory-determined data obtained with the ADAM infant model. This situation is almost certainly due to ethical considerations for the delivery of radio-isotopically labeled salbutamol to patients of the pertinent young age range, so that lung deposition assessments can be made by imaging methods, in particular gamma scintigraphy. It was, however, possible to compare the filter-collection data from the model with the values of oropharyngeal deposition and total lung deposition from one particular gamma scintigraphic deposition study undertaken in Israel by Tal et al. , with infants who inhaled radiolabeled salbutamol ( ). This comparison could be made since it had already been established by the impactor measurements with the infant ADAM model that nearly all the API mass emitted from its exit was present as fine particles capable of penetrating to the lungs. This comparison therefore provided a starting place to assess the realism achieved with this particular face-upper airway model. Tal et al. evaluated 15 infants and small children ranging from 3 months to 5 years of age (mean age 2 years), inhaling the medication via a similar-sized VHC-facemask to that used in the evaluation of the ADAM infant model ( ). It should be noted that they expressed their outcomes in percentage rather than absolute terms, based on the total mass of API delivered from the pMDI canister (100 μg/actuation label claim). They obtained 1.28 ± 0.77% (≡ 1.28 ± 0.77 μg/actuation) oropharyngeal deposition and 1.97 ± 1.4% (≡ 1.97 ± 1.4 μg/actuation) total lung deposition (both mean ± SD). Looking more closely at their data, the two infants closest in age (6 to 7 months) to the patient from which the ADAM model was developed, and who were not crying during administration of the medication (patients 8 and 13), had values of oropharyngeal deposition of 1.90% (≡ 1.90 μg/actuation) and 0.40% (≡ 0.40 μg/actuation), respectively. Their corresponding values of total lung deposition were 1.20% (≡ 1.20 μg/actuation) and 0.95% (≡ 0.95 μg/actuation), respectively. These values are of the same order as the overall ranges in mean values, regardless of breathing pattern, for nasopharyngeal deposition observed with the ADAM infant model studies that varied from <0.1 to 3.6 μg/actuation and deposition at the filter corresponding to DM carina that ranged from 0.3 to 9.4 μg/actuation. Tal et al. ( ), unfortunately, did not report specific breathing patterns for their patients that would have enabled the ranges quoted from the ADAM infant model evaluation to be related more precisely to their data. However, it is likely that these non-crying patients were tidally breathing, since they were each using a VHC-facemask. Deposition in the model nasopharynx was close to zero, except at the largest tidal volume (90 mL), where 1.0 ± 0.5 μg/actuation deposited at the slowest breathing rate (15 cycles/min), increasing to 3.6 ± 1.4 μg/actuation at the highest breathing rate (35 cycles/min) investigated. The deposited mass recovered from the face/nares of the model also increased with increasing tidal volume, from between 1 and 2 μg/actuation at 30 mL, but approaching 5 μg/actuation at 90 mL. Interestingly, although increases in breathing rate at each tidal volume had little effect on DM carina , the mass retained in the airway increased significantly at the two highest tidal volumes (2.3 ± 1.3 and 3.6 ± 1.4 μg/actuation at 70 and 90 mL, respectively). In overall terms, the observed behavior is likely the outcome of the onset of enhanced inertial/turbulent deposition to the various components of the model at the greater instantaneous flow rates that were associated with the larger tidal volumes and faster breathing rates. Both outcomes are closer to the clinical data of Tal et al. , for the two infants identified previously. However, these comparisons must be qualified by noting that Tal et al. delivered CFC- rather than HFA-salbutamol to their patients ( ). Nevertheless, the presence of a VHC would have been expected to reduce differences in aerosol plume transport from inhaler to patient resulting from variations in the propellant behavior during flash evaporation after leaving the metering valve of each type of pMDI ( ). Secondly, they reported oropharyngeal rather than nasopharyngeal deposition. Finally, the airways of their patients, all of whom had asthma, cystic fibrosis, or bronchopulmonary dysplasia, were therefore almost certainly partially obstructed ( , , ), in comparison with the fully patent airway that existed with the ADAM infant model. In summary, although there are a number of differences between the clinical data of Tal et al. ( ) and the in vitro generated data with the infant model, the fact that the resulting drug depositions are of the same order provides a degree of confidence in the clinical relevance of the values obtained for this ADAM model.
Small Child Model
Materials and Methods
The procedure for evaluating the child ADAM model, including the force with which the facemask was applied to the model face, was largely based on the methodology undertaken to evaluate the infant model (Fig. 1 ), so only differences are reported here. The VHC used in the evaluation was the 149-mL AeroChamber Plus ® with child ComfortSeal ® (medium) facemask. Each of this group of devices was mounted in turn on the same purpose-built cradle as was used in the evaluation of the infant model. The apex of the pear-shaped facemask was positioned such that the curved lip of the mask located where the bridge of the nose merged with the face. Ten actuations of salbutamol sulfate (Ventolin ® , GSK plc: 100 μg/actuation salbutamol base equivalent) were delivered to the VHC using the same inhaler ( n = 10 devices; 1 measurement per device). Three tidal breathing patterns with a fixed inspiratory/expiratory ratio of 1:2 were simulated, representing low, average, and high tidal volumes that might be encountered with children close to the age of 4 years (Table III ). The mass of salbutamol recovered from the filter (DM carina ), together with the corresponding mass of this API obtained from the pMDI actuator, retained in the VHC/facemask, deposited on the face/nostrils and in the upper airway of the model, was each determined by HPLC-UV spectrophotometry (Table IV ). This time, no supplementary cascade impactor data are reported, because preliminary measurements with a low-flow Marple-Miller impactor had confirmed that values of FPF <4.7 μm using this model were >99%. This outcome was similar to the situation with the corresponding measurements made with the infant model. Even though tidal volumes (and therefore peak inspiratory flow rates) were larger than those of the breathing patterns used to evaluate the infant model, it was considered that the increased size of the upper airway passages in the child model would likely offset any inertial deposition. It was therefore deemed reasonable to expect that the aerosol penetrating the upper airway of the model would predominantly comprise particles in the respirable range <5 μm aerodynamic diameter. Table III Three Child Tidal Breathing Patterns with Fixed Inspiratory/Expiratory Ratio of 1:2 Used to Investigate the VHC Performance with the ADAM Child Model Pattern Tidal volume (mL) Inspiratory/expiratory ratio Respiratory rate (breaths/min) A 120 1:2 25 B 250 20 C 400 15 Table IV Disposition of Salbutamol Recovered from pMDI Actuator Mouthpiece, Within the AeroChamber Plus ® VHC Interior, on the Model Face and Child Facemask Interior, in the Model Upper Airway, and Delivered to the Filter Distal to the Airway of the Model (DM carina ) Breathing pattern (code letter as in Table III ) Salbutamol mass (μg/actuation), mean ± SD pMDI actuator Retained by VHC/facemask Deposited on face/nostrils Deposited in airway Deposited on filter (DM carina ) Total mass A 25.6 ± 3.1 49.1 ± 6.4 2.2 ± 0.6 1.2 ± 0.4 16.1 ± 3.7 94.2 ± 5.3 B 22.6 ± 5.6 38.1 ± 3.2 3.7 ± 2.3 6.2 ± 1.3 24.0 ± 4.6 94.6 ± 5.4 C 18.9 ± 2.4 41.5 ± 6.0 3.6 ± 1.6 8.0 ± 3.8 26.2 ± 3.4 98.2 ± 4.3 n = 10 replicates/mean ± SD pMDI pressurized metered-dose inhaler, VHC valved holding chamber, DM carina delivered mass distal to the airway ( DM carina values are italicised to represent their significance in terms of predicting likely medication available for lung delivery)
Results
The total mass of salbutamol recovered from each determination was within ±20% of label claim (100 μg/actuation), as with the measurements evaluating the infant model. Again, many measurements were much closer to the mean value, indicating that mass recovery had been effective. Values of DM carina were equivalent for breathing patterns B and C corresponding to tidal volumes of 250 and 400 mL, respectively (paired t test, p = 0.23). This outcome is suggestive of a threshold tidal volume smaller than 250 mL, above which DM carina becomes largely insensitive to changes in tidal volume. This finding was later borne out by the outcome from comparable measures obtained at a much higher tidal volume of 770 mL with the adult model (described in the following section). More importantly, from the standpoint of the respiratory characteristics of smaller children with lower tidal volumes, DM carina increased substantially when tidal volume was increased from 120 mL/25 bpm (breathing pattern A in Table III ) to 250 mL/20 bpm (breathing pattern B), comparing the value [16.1 ± 3.7 μg/actuation at the smaller with the corresponding DM carina at the larger tidal volume (24.0 ± 4.6 μg/actuation); paired t test, p < 0.001]. This positively correlated dependency between DM carina and the magnitude of tidal volume continued the trend that was observed with the infant model. This outcome can be explained by the likelihood of more effective transport of the aerosol from the VHC interior as tidal volume was increased, via the facemask to the face model. The corresponding reduction in the mass retained within the facemask from 49.1 ± 6.4 μg/actuation at 120 mL tidal volume/25 bpm to 38.1 ± 3.2 μg/actuation when the tidal volume was increased to 250 mL at the faster breathing rate of 20 bpm supports this explanation. Since the child model has patent oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal passages, it is important to note that the mass of salbutamol recovered from the upper airway reflected contributions from particle deposition in both passageways. Values increased from 1.2 ± 0.4 μg/actuation at the smallest tidal volume (120 mL) to 6.2 ± 1.3 μg/actuation at the middle tidal volume (250 mL) and then to 8.0 ± 3.8 μg/actuation at the largest tidal volume (400 mL). These measures were generally larger than the corresponding nasopharyngeal airway deposition observed with the infant model at the slower breathing rates of 15 and 25 breaths/min. The observed airway deposition behavior in both infant and child models is most likely explained as the result of increased inertial/turbulent deposition at the higher particle velocities, as tidal volume was increased.
Comparison with Clinical Data
Two of the children (patient 7 aged 4 years with asthma and patient 11 aged 5 years with cystic fibrosis) studied by Tal et al. ( ), whose gamma scintigraphic study of inhaled salbutamol via pMDI with VHC-facemask has already been referred to in connection with evaluating the ADAM infant model, were of similar age to the nominal 4-year age simulated by the small child model. Interestingly, their reported oropharyngeal deposition values were 1.90 and 1.25%, respectively, both being quite close to the value of 1.2 ± 0.4% label claim (≡ 1.2 ± 0.4 μg/actuation) obtained at the lowest tidal volume (120 mL/25 bpm) with the child model. However, their corresponding lung deposition estimates of 3.95% (≡ 3.95 μg/actuation) and 3.50% (≡ 3.50 μg/actuation), respectively, were much lower than 16.1 ± 3.7 μg/actuation determined for DM carina at the same tidal volume with this ADAM model. The fact that both patients had obstructive lung disease may have accounted for some or all of the divergence between these clinical measures of lung delivery and the values obtained in vitro with the ADAM model.
Wildhaber et al. also undertook gamma scintigraphic studies with children aged from 12 to 146 months presenting with asthma. Their patients inhaled radiolabeled pMDI-delivered HFA-salbutamol (100 μg/actuation) from either a smaller or larger VHC, depending on their age ( ). Their add-on devices were treated with a pre-wash in detergent solution to eliminate possible bias from electrostatic charge retention. The data for sub-group A ( n = 8 patients), aged from 12 to 48 months, and sub-group B ( n = 5 patients), aged from 49 to 96 months, are the most relevant for comparison with the results obtained with the ADAM child model. However, this group did not report breathing pattern data from their patients, so it is not possible to relate directly their results to the tidal breathing parameters adopted for the evaluation of the ADAM face model. Despite this limitation, it is pertinent to note that they determined whole lung deposition (mean ± SD) as being 16.4 ± 5.5% in the case of group A, in which three patients were aged between 34 and 45 months. By comparison, the same measure for their middle sub-group B was 28.2 ± 6.7%. Both sets of data are closer to the range of mean DM carina (16.1 to 26.2 μg/actuation; 16.1 to 26.2% label claim mass/actuation) obtained with the ADAM model (Table IV ) than those of Tal et al. ( ), previously discussed. The most likely explanation for the improvement is that the cohort of patients studied by Wildhaber et al. had less obstructed airways. However, care should be taken in these comparisons, because as well as their unknown breathing patterns, group A inhaled their medication via a slightly larger VHC (330-mL Babyhaler ® device equipped with facemask, GSK plc) than the 149-mL AeroChamber Plus ® device used in the ADAM model evaluation. Furthermore, their older children in group B used the much larger (750-mL) Volumatic ® VHC (GSK plc). They did not specify the patient interface that they used, but it was most likely the mouthpiece option, given the fact that they did not report deposition in the facemask.
Consistency of the Performance with the Infant and Child ADAM Models
As an alternative way of evaluating the two ADAM pediatric models discussed thus far, Mitchell et al. compared measurements of DM carina made with both infant and child models ( ), after dividing the mass of salbutamol/actuation recovered at the filter of each model by the median body weight appropriate to each model to scale the measured drug delivery at this location in terms of body mass ( ). On this basis, almost all the results were found to lie within a relatively narrow range from 0.3 to 1.0 μg/kg, irrespective of tidal breathing pattern and model used (Fig. 11 ). This range is slightly lower, but still quite comparable in magnitude with dose ranges of 1.8 to 2.4 and 1.2 to 1.7 μg/kg for 6- to 12-month-old infants and 2- to 5-year-old children reported by the manufacturer of the inhaler (GSK, Inc.) in their US Patient Information Leaflet for this particular pMDI product used with the same VHC ( ). Fig. 11 Consistency in delivered mass per actuation (DM carina ) of salbutamol delivered by pMDI with VHC-facemask combinations divided by the age-appropriate median body weight simulated using ADAM infant, child, and adult face models; almost all results fall within 0.3 to 1.0 μg/kg, irrespective of breathing pattern
Adult Model
Materials and Methods
The methodology used to evaluate the two versions of the adult model (oropharynx only and oropharynx with face) was broadly similar to that described for the child model, so again only important methodological details are mentioned here. The pMDI-delivered salbutamol was delivered via 149-mL adult antistatic AeroChamber Plus ® VHCs ( n = 10 devices/group) in the following test configurations: 1. VHC with large adult facemask (oropharynx with face (Fig. 12 a)); 2. VHC with mouthpiece (oropharynx-only model (Fig. 12 b)). Fig. 12 ADAM adult model testing arrangements with a breathing simulator connected via an aerosol filter located to the distal end of the airway. a Where a VHC-facemask combination was evaluated, the facemask was applied to the face with a fixed and known nominal force (1.6 kg). b Model oropharynx for evaluating VHC-mouthpiece combination
The mucosa of the oropharynx was simulated by introducing the Brij-35 surfactant solution in methanol immediately before use. More surfactant was needed to cover the larger surface area associated with these adult models. Therefore, after draining excess from the lips, the model-on-test was placed horizontally for 1 min to allow the coating to penetrate all surfaces likely to come into contact with the aerosol, followed by repositioning vertically for a further 2-min period, applying a vacuum to the distal end of the airway to ensure that no excess coating remained within the airway. The breathing simulator was set to mimic a single adult tidal breathing condition (tidal volume = 770 mL, inspiratory/expiratory ratio = 1:2 and 12 breaths/min). These values corresponded with the adult (normal 1) pattern defined in the Canadian Standard for Spacers and VHCs ( , ).
The force with which the VHC-facemask was applied to the model face was the same as that used when evaluating both infant and child models (1.6 ± 0.1 kg), and the absence of leakage between facemask and face in tests using this model was confirmed before undertaking any measurements of medication delivery. The VHC-mouthpiece was inserted between the lips of the oropharynx-only model for the measurements with this group of devices.
Results
As with the measurements evaluating the previous models, the total mass of salbutamol recovered from each determination (Table V ) was within ±20% of label claim (100 μg/actuation), with mean values of 89.5 ± 3.0, and 95.3 ± 6.9 μg/actuation for the VHC-mouthpiece and VHC-facemask configurations, respectively. As previously encountered with the other models, many individual measurements were much closer to label claim, again indicating that mass recovery for this API had been effective. Table V Disposition of Salbutamol Recovered from pMDI Actuator Mouthpiece, Within the AeroChamber Plus ® VHC Interior, on the Adult Model Face and Facemask Interior (VHC-Facemask Combinations), in the Model Upper Airway, and Delivered to the Filter Distal to the Airway of the Model (DM carina ) Device combination (adult: V t = 770 mL; I/E ratio = 1:2; rate = 12/min) Salbutamol mass (μg/actuation), mean ± SD pMDI actuator Retained by VHC Deposited on face Deposited on facemask Deposited in airway Deposited on filter (DM carina ) Total mass VHC-mouthpiece 18.6 ± 1.7 26.9 ± 2.9 Not applicable Not applicable 13.0 ± 1.7 31.1 ± 3.0 89.5 ± 3.0 VHC-large facemask 25.6 ± 3.2 30.9 ± 5.0 2.8 ± 1.7 4.3 ± 1.5 3.9 ± 0.8 27.9 ± 7.5 95.3 ± 6.9 pMDI pressurized metered-dose inhaler, VHC valved holding chamber, DM carina delivered mass distal to the airway ( DM carina values are italicised to represent their significance in terms of predicting likely medication available for lung delivery)﻿I/E ratio﻿ = inspiratory/expiratory ratio
Comparison with Clinical Data
Values of DM carina for the VHC-mouthpiece group [31.1 ± 3.0 μg/actuation were comparable with the equivalent measure for the VHC-facemask group (27.9 ± 7.5 μg/actuation); Mann-Whitney rank-sum test, p = 0.12]. However, both measures were somewhat less than 41.8 ± 3.8% whole lung deposition reported in the study of Wildhaber et al. ( ) for group C (patients aged between 8 and 12 years inhaling radiolabeled salbutamol by pMDI-VHC combination and therefore nearest in age to adult users) that has already been mentioned in connection with the evaluation of the child ADAM model. However, it should be noted that this group inhaled their salbutamol medication via the larger Volumatic ® VHC equipped with a mouthpiece, rather than via the much smaller AeroChamber Plus ® VHC-facemask combination.
The mass of medication retained within the VHC-mouthpiece devices (26.9 ± 2.9 μg/actuation was marginally less than 30.9 ± 5.0 μg/actuation for the VHC-facemask group (unpaired t test, p = 0.039), but the difference is likely of no consequence clinically. A small amount of additional medication deposited inside the facemask (4.3 ± 1.5 μg/actuation) for this group of devices. This outcome was similar in magnitude to the facemask deposition (4.7 ± 2.8% ≡ 4.7 ± 2.8 μg/actuation) observed with the only group of patients in the study of Wildhaber et al. ( ) to inhale via this type of patient interface. The larger facemask deposition values in the present study is likely the result of both the adult facemask options having a larger internal surface area for particles to deposit than the infant-sized facemasks used by Wildhaber et al.
Retention of particles on the face of the ADAM model was 2.8 ± 1.7 μg/actuation for the VHC-facemask group. This outcome is quite similar to the magnitude of salbutamol deposition observed with the face of the child model (3.6 ± 1.6 μg/actuation at the highest tidal volume of 400 mL/15 bpm; breathing pattern C in Table IV ), where breathing conditions were closest to those used to evaluate the adult model (tidal volume of 770 mL/12 bpm). In this instance, comparison with clinical data could not be made, since Wildhaber et al. did not report facial deposition of salbutamol in their study.
Interestingly, significantly more medication was consistently deposited in the upper airway when the VHC-mouthpiece group of devices was evaluated (13.0 ± 1.7 μg/actuation) than for the VHC-facemask group (3.7 ± 0.8 μg/actuation; p < 0.001). The flow of retained aerosol from the interior of the VHC when the inhalation valve opens at the start of each inhalation is uninterrupted in mouthpiece-to-oropharynx transport compared with the passage from this valve across the space between facemask and the mouth of the face model. Hence, inertial deposition of the largest particles in the upper airway may be more likely in the former condition. However, establishing the root cause of this divergence in outcomes between the two types of patient interface is outside the scope of the present study but may be worthy of investigation in the future, although the amounts deposited on the filter were not markedly different.
It is informative, as was done with the equivalent data for the infant and child models, to scale these values in terms of average body weight for US males (89.1 kg) and females (75.5 kg), respectively ( ). This transformation of the data resulted in values for male subjects in the range 0.31 to 0.35 μg/kg for both the VHC-mouthpiece and VHC-facemask groups. The corresponding range for females was from 0.37 to 0.41 μg/kg. There is therefore a large attenuation in the emitted mass from the inhaler by the time that the medication reaches the distal end of the upper airway of all models. Nevertheless, in the summary of data from all three ADAM face models (Fig. 11 ), it can be seen that the cluster of data points at 770 mL tidal volume continue the slight downward trend observed transitioning from the infant to the child models, already discussed. These values of DM carina /body weight from the face model are between 24 and 32% of the 1.3 μg/kg indicated by the manufacturer ( ) as total medication (100 μg/actuation ex metering valve) delivered to a 70-kg-weight adult (male or female) without the use of VHC with facemask. Typically, VHCs remove from 50 to 75% of the label claim emitted mass/actuation, mostly by eliminating almost all the coarse mass fraction >ca. 5 μm aerodynamic diameter by a combination of inertial and turbulent deposition ( ). The values of DM carina obtained with the adult model in the present study are therefore believed to be realistic.
Choice of Formulation
All of the experimental work to evaluate the suite of ADAM models was undertaken with the same salbutamol -based pMDI product (Ventolin ® ) to avoid introducing additional variability that has been shown to be associated with the use of different marketed brands containing this particular API ( ). These models could be used in a future study to evaluate how such differences might impact the delivery of salbutamol via VHC rather than using the pMDI alone.
Limitations of the Models
The suite of ADAM face models was developed as an aid to enable the more clinically appropriate testing of VHCs to be achieved with a facemask as the patient interface. However, it must be recognized that all such models are, to a greater or lesser extent, a compromise between the desire to achieve the closest degree of realism to the face of a user of the appropriate age range, and the inability to incorporate all the complexity associated with factors that control the critical dimensions of the tissues comprising an individual’s face and upper airway, based on their genetic profile. Early in the development of these models, it was realized from the work of Shah et al. ( ) that it was most important to recreate an as-realistic-as-possible approximation to the mechanical responsiveness of the soft tissues of the face, so that a realistic dead space could be achieved when the facemask is applied to the model with a well-defined force. The choice of silicone elastomer having a Shore hardness in the range 30–50 to model these tissues was made based on data obtained from individual volunteers, and it is acknowledged that this range may therefore not be representative of the relevant sub-populations (infant, small child, and adult) as a whole. In future model development, there would therefore be merit in undertaking a more comprehensive assessment of soft tissue mechanical responsiveness. Such an evaluation should ideally explore both changes associated with age as well as assess whether the chosen range lies wholly within the variability associated with each sub-population.
The decision to limit the realization of the underlying bony or cartilaginous (firm) tissues to rudimentary support structures for the anatomically realistic upper airway was a further compromise. However, the fact that these tissues do not come into contact with the facemask of the inhaler, is believed to be sufficient justification for not attempting to recreate these tissues having complex geometries in exact anatomic reality.
The incorporation of an anatomically accurate upper airway derived by imaging from a single patient into each model, though providing realistic pathways for aerosol transport to the filter modeling penetration as far as the entry to the lungs, is limited to the geometries of those particular individuals. It is well known that for adults at least, the dimensions of the upper airway are quite variable, which is one reason why the European-based Oropharyngeal Consortium comprising scientists from GSK, AstraZeneca, and Sanofi-Aventis in their cooperation with the Hammersmith Hospitals, London, UK, developed a range of realistic models of the oropharyngeal region that resulted in the development of small, medium, and large adult airways ( ). Adaptation of appropriately scaled adult face models, developed using the ADAM approach, for use with each size of airway could therefore potentially prove advantageous in understanding the effect of facial upper airway size variability on aerosol transport from pMDI-VHC combinations. However, such a development would, by definition, be limited to the adult situation. An alternative approach that would enable the natural variability associated with upper airway geometry with users to be incorporated into the infant and small child face models would be to integrate them with the age-appropriate idealized upper airways for adult ( ), small child ( ), and infant ( ) by Finlay’s group at the University of Alberta. These idealized airways were developed to take into account patient-to-patient anatomic variability.
The lack of a premature/full-term neonate ADAM model is also perceived as a limitation of the present work, given the increasing importance of inhaled medication delivery to this sub-population as a means of mitigating or preventing long-term lung disease ( , , ). A 26-week gestation premature neonate model, based on the ADAM concepts (Fig. 13 ), has therefore been taken as far as the initial development stage but remains to be evaluated. This model was developed as a scaled version of the infant ADAM model containing an anatomically correct nasopharyngeal airway, based on discussions with neonatologists in the light of the unavailability of live patients of this gestation that could be imaged for ethical reasons. The model therefore contains a nasopharynx realized using a stereolithographic process from a head-only CT scan, modeled using cranial imaging software (V-Works v.4.0; CyberMed, Centreville, VA, USA) by Youngquist et al. ( ). The decision was taken not to model any underlying form tissue structure, as bone mineralization of the skull would have only just begun at this early stage of life ( ). The evaluation of this model is anticipated to take place once an appropriate spacer/VHC-facemask delivery device has been established for this sub-population. Fig. 13 Twenty-eight-week premature ADAM neonate face model; this model contains an anatomic nasopharynx scaled to the ADAM infant model
Finally, at the opposite end of the age spectrum, we acknowledge the need to extend the ADAM concept beyond the existing adult model for VHC-facemask evaluations to the geriatric age range, given the widespread need for facemask use by this age category of patients.
Conclusions
A series of face models based on a 7-month-old infant, 4-year-old small child, and adult of indeterminate age has been developed for the purpose of evaluating inhaler-facemask combinations. Each model incorporates soft tissue modeling where the facemask locates onto the face, so that the internal dead space between facemask and face is realistic. Furthermore, each model incorporates appropriate anatomic upper airway(s) so that aerosol collected at the distal exit on a filter can be collected and used to determine the likely mass of API delivered to the carina and therefore capable of reaching the airways of the lungs, and also its aerodynamic particle size distribution, when sampled via a suitable cascade impactor. Each model has been assessed using pMDI-delivered salbutamol via similar sized VHCs with facemask appropriate to the age represented by the model. Our data show for the first time the continuum in DM carina /body mass for the test of pMDI-delivered salbutamol formulation that exists across the range of models, representing all ages of potential users of this type of inhaler in conjunction with a particular family of VHCs. An adult oropharyngeal model with lips, based on the same geometry as that used for the oropharynx of the adult face model, has also been developed and evaluated with VHC-mouthpiece devices. Measures of DM carina using this model are consistent with the equivalent data obtained from the corresponding VHC-facemask combination using the ADAM adult face model.
It is hoped that the ADAM models will find wider use in the evaluation of all types of orally inhaled product. Furthermore, the principles underlying the development of the ADAM models appear to be capable of being applied in the development of future models where needed for the support of inhaled medication delivery devices intended for other sub-populations, in particular for premature/full-term neonate infants.