INTRODUCTION
The parenteral administration of drugs can have significant advantages over oral absorption and remains the delivery route of choice for most large molecules such as peptides and proteins ( ). These benefits include bypassing biopharmaceutical challenges such as low solubility and poor permeability through biological membranes, avoiding degradation in the GI tract, and limiting first pass metabolism. Optimization of parenteral formulations is critical to predict the behavior of the drug after administration, particularly after dilution of the formulation upon injection, and accordingly, it is important to understand the physiological environment encountered by the formulation ( ). Intravenous (IV) administration of drugs directly exposes the formulation to bulk fluid in systemic circulation. In contrast, subcutaneous (SC) or intramuscular (IM) injection presents a different physiological environment. After injection, the formulation is in close contact with an extracellular matrix consisting of a fibrous polymer framework of collagen and hyaluronic acid components surrounding physiological tissue ( , , , ). This extracellular matrix behaves more like a gel rather than bulk fluid, which results in significant differences in mass transport and diffusion of the drug which can affect its overall absorption profile ( ). In order to understand the bioperformance of a formulation administered subcutaneously, it is critical to recognize the effect this surrounding environment may have. For example, standard evaluations of the solubilization and dissolution of a formulation in bulk fluids such as buffers may not realistically reflect the behavior of the formulation in the extracellular matrix. As a result of these challenges, it has been difficult to develop a suitable and general in vitro model for the release and behavior of parenteral formulations after SC or IM injection ( , , , ).
While a large number of simulated biorelevant media for physiological fluids have been developed, there has not been a standard accepted medium for simulation of the subcutaneous or intramuscular environment ( , ). Hydrogels have been proposed as a potential model for more realistic conditions for the extracellular matrix encountered by parenteral formulations ( , ). Agarose is a hydrogel consisting of a linear polysaccharide material and has been used for a variety of applications. At relatively low concentrations in aqueous solution, it sets to form a gel at room temperature. Agarose gels form a three-dimensional structure that contains mostly water but have measured pore sizes similar to those encountered in physiological tissue ( , , ). As a result, diffusion and transport of drugs through agarose gels may provide more realistic conditions for formulations administered via SC and IM injection compared to typical bulk fluid dissolution media. Our goal was to use differences in diffusion rate in agarose gels as an approach to parenteral formulation optimization, particularly in cases where diffusion through subcutaneous tissue may be rate limiting.
Since formulation optimization can be a time-consuming and iterative process, it was important to develop an automated analytical method that would allow for continuous measurement of drug concentrations without the need for manual intervention. In the present research, the diffusion of drug through an agarose gel layer was monitored by continuously measuring the release of the drug into a sink reservoir layer consisting of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) in real time. This release model was tested using both large peptides and small-molecule formulations by using a number of commercial insulin products as well as with a diverse set of formulations of the small-molecule naproxen. These results were then correlated with the in vivo behavior and time-action profiles for these formulations.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Reagents and solvents were obtained from commercial sources and used as received unless otherwise noted. Commercial U100 insulin (100 units of insulin per milliliter) products were obtained from Myoderm, USA. Crystalline-free acid naproxen, agarose (BioReagent, for molecular biology, low EEO), and polyethyleneglycol 400 (PEG400) were obtained from Sigma Aldrich, USA. Methocel™ A4C (MC, molecular weight 13,000 g/mol) was supplied by Dow Chemicals, USA. Polyvinylpyrrolidone K29-32 (PVP), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and 1 N sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were purchased from Fisher Scientific, USA. Loadings and concentrations are reported as weight percent (wt%) unless otherwise noted.
In Vitro Experimental Techniques
Preparation of Naproxen Solution and Suspension Formulations
Various formulations of naproxen were prepared at a target concentration of 3.5 mg/mL. A conventional aqueous suspension formulation of the naproxen-free acid in 0.5% MC was prepared by simple mixing resulting in a suspension with an average particle size of 5 μm. An aqueous solution formulation of naproxen was prepared by adding 1 M equivalent of a 1-N NaOH stock solution to form the in situ sodium salt. To form this solution, half of the total required volume of 0.5% MC was added to naproxen followed by addition of one stoichiometric equivalent of 1 N NaOH to the sample and stirring until a clear solution was obtained. Additional 0.5% MC vehicle was then added to obtain a solution at the target concentration. A co-solvent solution formulation of the naproxen-free acid was prepared by simple mixing with PEG400. Naproxen-free acid was added directly to the PEG 400 vehicle and stirred gently to give a clear solution.
Preparation and Evaluation of Naproxen Nanosuspension Formulation
Naproxen was nanomilled using the acoustic mixing procedure previously reported ( , ). A 4-mL glass vial was charged with 500 μm Tosoh YTZ milling media (9.12 g). Naproxen (17.5 mg) was then added as a solid. In a separate container, an aqueous solution of water (1.628 mL), 5% PVP K29-32 stock solution (88 μL), and 1% SDS stock solution (18 μL) was prepared. The aqueous mixture was then added to the vial containing the drug and milling media. The slurry was stirred gently using a spatula to ensure that the drug solid was suitably wetted. The vial was capped and then mixed on a Resodyn LabRAM ResonantAcoustic® mixer at 40% intensity (∼50-G’s acceleration) for 120 min. The nanosuspension formed was recovered and separated from the grinding media using a syringe equipped with a 25-gauge syringe needle. Particle size measurements of the nanosuspensions were obtained using a Wyatt DynaPro™ Plate Reader Dynamic Light Scattering instrument. The nanosuspension samples were diluted with water to approximately 1 mg/mL concentration, and 25 μL was dispensed into a Corning® low-volume black polystyrene 384-well plate for analysis. The particle size was reported as an average of ten acquisitions with an acquisition time of 3 s at 25°C. The autocorrelation curves obtained were fitted, and the average particle diameter was determined using the cumulant model, and the average particle diameter was determined to be 260 nm. For the in vitro release and in vivo studies, the concentration of naproxen was maintained at 3.5 mg/mL as was for the other solutions and suspensions (“ Preparation of Naproxen Solution and Suspension Formulations ” section).
Procedure for Evaluating Rate of Drug Diffusion and Release from Agarose Gel
A stock solution of 1% agarose was prepared by suspending agarose (100 mg) in phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4, ﻿ 9.9 mL). The suspension was heated to 80°C with constant stirring until a clear solution was obtained. The stock solution was then cooled to 60°C. A 3.5 mL quartz cuvette with a 10-mm path length was used. A 50 μL aliquot of the formulation under evaluation was dispensed onto the bottom of the cuvette. The 1% agarose stock solution was then added (300 μL). The combined sample was gently mixed to disperse the formulation within the gel and then placed in a 5°C stability chamber for 5 min to allow the gel to set. An additional layer of the 1% agarose stock solution was then added (300 μL), and the sample was placed in a 5°C stability chamber for an additional 5 min to allow the gel to set. This was followed by addition of 3 mL of PBS as the final supernatant layer. The dose of the formulation used in the system was kept under the solubility concentration limit of the drug for all of the analyzed formulations to ensure that sink conditions were maintained. The cuvette was capped and then placed within a Molecular Dynamics SpectraMax Plus 384 spectrometer pre-heated at 37°C. A kinetic measurement protocol was followed, and the absorption at an appropriate wavelength corresponding to the drug molecule was then measured every 1 min until complete release was observed. The studies were performed in duplicate to demonstrate reproducibility.
Viscosity Measurements
The viscosity of the naproxen formulations as prepared and after dispersion in PBS was measured using a Cambridge VISCOlab 3000 viscometer. A recirculating water bath was used to maintain a temperature of 37°C at the sample chamber. The formulation sample (0.5 mL) was added to the sample chamber, and the viscosity was recorded after the measurements had stabilized to <0.1% variation.
In Vivo Pharmacokinetic Procedure
Dosing Procedure
Twelve male Wistar Hannover rats were used for in vivo experiments. The rats were fasted overnight before dosing, provided water ad libitum , and fed 4 h following drug treatment. Blood was collected at predetermined intervals for all species into EDTA-containing tubes and centrifuged. Plasma was harvested and stored at −70°C until analysis.
All the rats were dosed subcutaneously at 3.5 mg/kg using a dose volume of 1.0 mL/kg for this experiment. Three rats were given an aqueous naproxen solution (0.5% MC + 1 eq. NaOH), three rats were given a naproxen nanosuspension (PVP K29-32 + SDS), three were given a naproxen suspension (0.5% MC), and three were given a co-solvent naproxen solution (PEG400). Studies were conducted following the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) convention. Serial plasma samples were collected at 0, 5, 15, and 30 min, and at 1-, 2-, 4-, 7-, 12-, 18-, and 24-h post dose. Plasma was collected by centrifugation, and plasma concentrations of test compound were determined by LC-MS/MS following protein precipitation with acetonitrile. All studies were conducted under a protocol approved by the Merck & Co. IACUC.
Bioanalytical Method
Sample Preparation
Concentrations of naproxen in rat plasma were determined by protein precipitation followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. Calibration curves were generated and verified using standards and samples prepared from an initial weighing of high-purity compound. For the analysis of the plasma samples, standard samples were prepared by addition of 50 μL of standard solutions containing 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, 5000, 10,000, 20,000, and 50,000 ng/mL target compound in 1:1 acetonitrile:water ( v : v ) to 50-μL aliquots of control plasma. This yielded standard samples effectively containing 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000, 2500, 5000, 10,000, and 25,000 ng/mL of the target compound.
For all unknown samples, 50 μL were used from each sample vial for analysis. To all aliquots of standards, 50 μL of 1:1 acetonitrile:water was then added. This was followed by protein precipitation with 1000 μL of acetonitrile containing 100–200 ng/mL of internal standard mixture. The sample mixtures were then lightly vortex-mixed. After spinning in a centrifuge for 5 min at 4000 rpm, the supernatants were transferred to clean 96-well plates. The sample mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.
Instrumental Analysis
The LC-MS/MS system consisted of a Thermo Scientific LX2 autosampler equipped with two Transcend System pumps and an Applied Biosystems/MSD Sciex API5000 mass spectrometer. Chromatographic separation of the analytes was achieved on a Waters Acquity HSS T3 column (2.1 × 50 mm, 1.8 μm particle size) in conjunction with gradient conditions and mobile phases A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The total run time was 3.5 min. Mass spectrometric detection of the analytes was accomplished using the Turbo Spray interface operated in the positive ion mode. Analyte response was measured by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) of transitions unique to each compound in positive ion mode. The MRM transition used for naproxen was 231.1/184.8, and the MRM transition used for the internal standard, labetalol, was 329.2/162.1.
Software and Calculations
Data were acquired and integrated by Sciex Analyst 1.6.1 software. Data were processed using Thermo Electron Corporation Watson v7.4. Peak area ratios of analyte to internal standard were plotted as a function of the nominal concentrations of the analyte. A line of best fit was generated from the curve points using linear or powerfit regression type. The equation of this line was used to calculate the concentrations in the all samples.
Calculation of Pharmacokinetic Parameters
Pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated using established non-compartmental methods. The area under the plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC) was determined using the Watson software (version 7.4) with linear trapezoidal interpolation in the ascending slope and logarithmic trapezoidal interpolation in the descending slope. The portion of the AUC from the last measurable concentration to infinity was estimated from the equation, C t / k el , where C t represents the last measurable concentration and k el is the elimination rate constant. The latter was determined from the concentration versus time curve by linear regression at the terminal phase of the semi-logarithmic plot.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Gel Diffusion Assay Design
The use of hydrogels as a potential mimic of subcutaneous tissue has been proposed previously, and the diffusion of drugs through hydrogels has been studied as a surrogate for in vivo tissue ranging from subcutaneous to ocular and brain tissue ( , , , , , , , , , , , ). However, many of the reported assays require removing samples of the gel phase directly by carefully cutting out sections or by sampling aliquots of a liquid supernatant layer, both of which are time-consuming activities. In order to accelerate formulation optimization, we wanted to streamline the process by enabling the continuous real-time detection of drug diffusion within a single system in situ without requiring manual intervention. UV/vis monitoring provides a rapid technique amenable for real-time analysis and has been previously utilized by Østergaard and coworkers to directly monitor the diffusion of lipid formulations of piroxicam into agarose gels ( ). In that case, the formulation and gel phase were prepared as separate layers and diffusion of the drug into the gel layer occurred at the interfacial boundary. However, the formulation is not directly injected into the gel phase, and different components may diffuse separately into the gel at different rates, which may impact behavior. More recently, the subcutaneous injection site simulator (SCISSOR) system has been developed to provide a more sophisticated simulation of the subcutaneous injection site ( ). The SCISSOR system consists of a dialysis cassette containing a gel phase mimicking the extracellular matrix suspended in a sink reservoir containing physiological media. The formulation to be tested can be injected into the gel phase within the dialysis cassette, and appearance of drug diffusing into the sink could be monitored. In a complementary approach to these strategies, we hoped to use a simplified approach with conventional laboratory equipment to determine drug diffusion. This involved evaluating the effect of embedding the formulation completely within the gel phase to better simulate in vivo injection into the subcutaneous environment and directly determining diffusion of the drug without the need for artificial barriers such as dialysis membranes.
In our studies, gels consisting of an agarose concentration of 1% were used to facilitate ease of dispensing, as higher agarose concentrations resulted in viscous solutions that were more difficult to dispense reproducibly on the small scale. Agarose concentrations less than 1% gave gels that lacked sufficient physical and structural stability when layered with buffer. It is appropriate to mention that 1% agarose concentration is not suggested to represent a direct physiological relevant comparison but instead provide a qualitative in vitro model for the relative rank ordering of various injectable formulations to be studied.
The experimental design developed here was adapted from previous studies by Merkle and coworkers ( ). A conventional 3.5 mL quartz cuvette with a 10 mm path length was used as the container (Fig. 1a, b ). The drug and formulation were effectively embedded within a gel phase at the bottom of the cuvette. A second agarose gel layer was then added above this and allowed to set to ensure that all of the drug and formulation was in contact with the gel phase. This was done to prevent a fast burst release of drug from the surface of the first gel layer as well as to minimize any contamination risk from residual drug formulation that may have remained exposed on the corners of the cuvette wall above the gel layer due to capillary action. Finally, PBS buffer was then added to form a sink reservoir above the agarose gel phase ( ). The diffusion of the drug from the gel phase into the sink was intended to simulate the diffusion of the drug from subcutaneous tissue into systemic circulation. Fig. 1 a Schematic showing layers of formulation and agarose gel followed by PBS dissolution media contained within a single standard cuvette. b Actual cuvette with the agarose gels. Note that due to surface tension and capillary action, the top layer is not flat and has a meniscus. The second layer of agarose was required to prevent risk of premature contamination of the PBS supernatant layer with residual drug
The cuvette was then placed within a Spectramax Plus 384 spectrometer and absorption measurements could be obtained continuously in real time in situ without requiring manual removal of sample aliquots from either the gel or solution phase. Importantly, the agarose gel layers were kept below the Z dimension of the optical path for analysis for the SpectraMax Plus 384 spectrometer (15.87 mm), such that the absorption measurements were made only on the PBS buffer supernatant layer with no interference from the gel. The 1% agarose gel layers remained physically stable once set and did not dissociate into the PBS supernatant layer which was verified by control gel experiments and UV analysis. The appearance of drug diffusing through and being released from the gel layer into the PBS buffer layer could thus be monitored. This process also allowed for a large number of data points to be collected, resulting in easier differentiation between various formulations. In order to avoid disruption to the integrity of the gel phase as well as to evaluate the native diffusion rate of the drug with the gel without the influence of external forces, the supernatant layer was not stirred during the experiment; however, if diffusion through the gel is truly the rate-limiting step for the mechanism of release, then subsequent diffusion through the PBS buffer should be faster and not influence the resulting kinetic results, which is consistent with the data observed (see below). The rate of appearance of drug after diffusing from the gel phase could then be used to differentiate the in vitro behavior of the various formulations and correlate with their in vivo behavior.
Differentiation of Large-Molecule Insulin Formulations
In order to validate the assay design, we evaluated a number of commercial parenteral insulin products with known in vivo time-action and bioperformance profiles. There are a large number of insulin products on the market that are administered via subcutaneous injection. The rate of release and absorption time-action profile of these insulins is critical to their performance ( ). In general, most commercially available insulin products have been optimized to be either rapid-acting in order to simulate immediate prandial insulin release or long-acting in order to simulate a steady-state basal insulin release ( , , ). The majority of these insulin products are prepared as solution formulations, and their time action is due to differences in diffusion and absorption of the dissolved insulin species through subcutaneous tissue rather than differences in dissolution. We selected a number of rapid-, intermediate-, and long-acting commercially available insulin products to evaluate in this assay.
In the gel diffusion release assay, each insulin product was mixed and embedded within the first agarose gel layer. Appearance of the insulin in the PBS buffer layer was then monitored continuously to measure the rate of diffusion and release of the insulin from the formulation embedded in the gel. The total concentration of each insulin product within the cuvette was maintained below the solubility limit during the entirety of the experiment. The U100 equivalent concentration (100 standard units of insulin per mL) for each insulin product was used to compare with the expected behavior of the products in the patient. As a result, the percentage of insulin released in each sample was used to compare the release profiles of the different insulin products.
Novolog™ (insulin aspart) was the first insulin product evaluated. Novolog™ is a rapid-acting insulin consisting of a modified recombinant human insulin formulated as an aqueous solution with a fast rate of action post injection. In the gel diffusion assay, appearance of the insulin was observed over time, and quantitative release from the gel layer was observed after 16–18 h, at which point the insulin was fully equilibrated at a final steady-state concentration within both the gel and PBS buffer layers (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Appearance of insulin from Novolog™ formulation in PBS after being embedded in agarose gel
The reproducibility of the diffusion assay was also investigated. The average results as well as the standard deviation for the initial time points for two separate runs for Novolog™ are shown in Fig. 3 . Since this method was designed to allow for a near continuous and real-time analysis of the rate of release of the drug, the initial slope of the concentration of drug released over time ( e.g. , 0–60 min) could be clearly defined and was linear with respect to time, suggesting that pseudo-zero-order kinetics were governing the initial rates. This is consistent with a mechanism where diffusion of the drug is rate-limiting and initially can be assumed to be occurring solely from the gel to the supernatant layer. As a result, the initial slopes could be used to simplify the comparison of the relative rates of diffusion and release for each formulation before steady-state equilibrium has been achieved. The average initial slope for the Novolog™ samples was 4.83 ± 0.03 × 10 −1 %/min. As can be seen, the data obtained from the diffusion assay is highly reproducible with little variability and error. Fig. 3 The initial rate of release data over time for Novolog™ (aspart) showing reproducibility and standard error of the gel diffusion assay
Differences in the diffusion and initial rate of release of the various selected insulin products from the gel layer could be differentiated and correlated with their known in vivo time-action profile (Table I ). The %release of the U100 concentration rather than absolute concentration for each insulin product was used to facilitate a direct comparison for the expected behavior of an injection of similar volume. The in vitro diffusion assay resulted in a highly predictive rank ordering of the in vivo time-action profile of the insulin products. The rapid-acting insulin product Novolog™ had the highest initial slope and fastest initial rate of release. In contrast, the long-acting insulin product Lantus™ had the lowest initial slope and slowest initial rate of release (Fig. 4 ). Table I Comparison of Human Time Action Profile (Based on Manufacturer Prescribing Information and Clinical Studies) ( ) and Gel Diffusion Results for Commercial Insulin Products Commercial insulin Human time action profile In vitro gel diffusion data T Onset (min) T Peak effect (min) Initial slope (% · min −1 ) Novolog™ (aspart) 10–20 40–50 0.483 Humulin™ (RHI) 30–60 120–300 0.433 Novolin N™ (NPH) 60–120 240–720 0.396 Lantus™ (glargine) 60–90 Flat action 0.320 Fig. 4 The initial rate of release data over time for rapid-, intermediate-, and slow-acting commercial insulin products obtained from the gel diffusion assay
The gel diffusion assay was able to distinguish the behavior of the insulin formulations based on different factors. The Novolog™ formulation is primarily composed of insulin monomers and dimers ( ). In contrast, Humulin™ typically consists of insulin hexamers ( ), which diffuse at a slower rate and is manifested by longer time for onset and peak action in vivo ( ). Novolin N™ consists of a suspension of insulin hexamers complexed to protamine, forming larger aggregates that have poor solubility. The resulting dissolution and slow diffusion of the insulin complex result in a slower rate of release. Lantus™ consists of higher-order insulin aggregates in solution, resulting in a slower rate of release as well ( , ). In addition, Lantus™ contains modifications to the insulin molecule that shifts its isoelectric point into the physiological range such that it precipitates upon injection. This effect was observed in the gel assay upon mixing the formulation with the gel solution. The resulting precipitate dissolves and then slowly diffuses through the gel phase. It should be pointed out here that the performance of each formulation in vivo may not be solely limited by dissolution and diffusion alone but may also be affected by absorption into the blood capillaries and lymphatic system. This diffusion method does not account for the effect of membrane absorption but we believe that the excellent correlations with in vivo performance for the different insulin products highlight that we are able to capture the differences through the effect of diffusion alone.
Differentiation of Small-Molecule Formulations
In Vitro Differentiation
The ability of the gel diffusion release model to differentiate the behavior of formulations of small molecules was also investigated. Naproxen is a relatively low-solubility small molecule free acid that can be formulated in a diverse number of ways ( ). We evaluated how the diffusion properties of naproxen could be modified in several different formulations. These formulations had a fixed naproxen concentration of 3.5 mg/mL, and they included (1) an aqueous solution using 1 N NaOH and 0.5% MC, (2) an aqueous nanosuspension, (3) a conventional suspension in 0.5% MC, and (4) a non-aqueous co-solvent solution in PEG400. The amount of naproxen used in the analysis was such that it was fully soluble in the release medium within the cuvette.
When the aqueous solution formulation was mixed with the gel, a linear increase in concentration of naproxen in the supernatant was observed during the initial time points of the assay. The results were also highly reproducible with low standard errors based on separate runs using the aqueous solution formulation of naproxen (Fig. 5 ). The average initial slope for the solution formulation was 1.33 ± 0.06 × 10 −4 mg/mL/min. This is similar to the behavior observed for the insulin products and also suggests that the initial rates of release were pseudo-zero order and controlled by rate-limiting diffusion through the gel phase. Fig. 5 The initial rate of release data over time for aqueous solution formulations of naproxen showing reproducibility and standard error of the gel diffusion assay
The different formulations of naproxen were then tested in the assay to determine differences in rates of diffusion (Fig. 6 ). The differences in the slopes for the appearance of naproxen over time could be used for qualitative comparisons of formulation performance (Table II ). Interestingly, the rates of diffusion for the aqueous solution and the nanosuspension formulation were nearly identical. This result was consistent with the behavior of the formulations observed visually; the nanosuspension formulation rapidly dissolved to form a solution upon mixing with the first layer of 1% agarose stock solution during the gelling process. For the conventional suspension formulation of naproxen, there is a lag time of ∼50 min before the larger drug particles fully dissolved within the gel phase. However, upon complete dissolution, the linear slope for the rate of release of the suspension was similar to that for the solution and nanosuspension formulations. The comparable rate of release suggested that when fully dissolved in solution, the three aqueous formulations behaved similarly and diffused at a consistent rate within the gel layer. Fig. 6 Initial rates of release of naproxen from the agarose gel layer for the different formulations of naproxen Table II The Results for the Initial Rates of Release in the Gel Diffusion Assay for Various Naproxen Formulations Naproxen formulation Initial slope (mg/mL/min) Solution (0.5% MC + 1 eq. NaOH) 1.33 × 10 −4 Nanosuspension (PVP K29-32 + SDS) 1.37 × 10 −4 Conventional suspension (0.5% MC) 1.31 × 10 −4 Solution (PEG400) 0.92 × 10 −4
Interestingly, the solution formulation of naproxen in the non-aqueous co-solvent PEG400 displayed a significantly lower slope for rate of release compared to the three aqueous formulations. No precipitation was observed upon dispersion of the PEG400 solution formulation into the agarose solution on visual observation. Since the naproxen remained in solution, it was unlikely that differences in dissolution and solubilization resulted in the difference in rate of diffusion within the gel. Instead, the viscosities of the solution formulations were measured at 37°C to determine whether those differences could impact the rate of gel diffusion. The viscosity of the naproxen formulation in PEG400 was significantly higher than that of the aqueous formulation (Table III ). It was difficult to measure the viscosity of the formulation within the agarose gel once it was set, so the viscosity of the formulations after dispersion into 600 μL of PBS rather than 1% agarose in PBS was measured to estimate the change in local viscosity encountered after dilution of the formulation during the assay. The difference in viscosity was reduced but could still be distinguished between the two formulations even after the PBS dilution. This difference in viscosity is likely one factor in the slower rate of diffusion and release from the gel layer and demonstrates the ability of the gel diffusion assay to characterize the impact that excipients can impart on formulation behavior ( , , ). Alternatively, another possibility is that the fraction of free drug which is available to diffuse from the PEG400 solution is less than that in the aqueous formulations. This could be due to an interaction between PEG400 and naproxen, and we plan to study this in future work. Table III Measured Viscosity of Solution Formulations of Naproxen Before and After Twelve-fold Dilution into PBS Naproxen formulation Formulation viscosity (cP) 12× PBS dispersion viscosity (cP) Aqueous solution (0.5% MC + 1 eq. NaOH) 1.49 ± 0.001 0.74 ± 0.0007 Non-aqueous solution (PEG400) 43.73 ± 0.04 0.92 ± 0.0009
In Vivo Differentiation
After determining that the gel diffusion and release model could distinguish in vitro differences in the various naproxen formulations, the in vivo behavior of the naproxen formulations was then assessed for comparison. The four different formulations were compared at the same dose concentration after being administered via subcutaneous injection in rat. The pharmacokinetic plasma concentration data was then collected over a period of 24 h.
As seen in Table IV , as predicted by the gel diffusion data, the aqueous solution and aqueous nanosuspension formulations gave nearly identical bioperformance and time-action profiles with similar AUC, C max , and T max parameters. A very rapid T max was observed for both formulations, suggesting rapid diffusion and uptake through the subcutaneous tissue environment. This behavior agrees with the in vitro gel diffusion data for these formulations and also suggests that the nanosuspension rapidly dissolves to give a solution upon injection. In contrast, the conventional aqueous suspension formulation of naproxen in 0.5% MC gave more variable data with slightly lower average AUC and C max values. The increased variability in the in vivo data may be due to differences in dissolution rate for the larger particles in the formulation within the subcutaneous environment. The dependence of diffusion of naproxen on the initial dissolution rate of the solid material is consistent with the differences in the initial release behavior observed for the conventional suspension formulation in the in vitro gel diffusion assay compared to the aqueous solution and nanosuspension formulations. Table IV Pharmacokinetic Parameters for Naproxen Formulations Dosed Subcutaneously in Rat at 3.5 mg/kg PK parameter Solution (0.5% MC + 1 eq. NaOH) Nanosuspension (0.09% PVP K29/32, 0.004% SDS) Suspension (0.5% MC) Solution (PEG400) AUC (0–24 h) (μM · hour) 352.8 ± 31.1 375.3 ± 54.9 269.7 ± 143.6 345.8 ± 49.5 C max (μM) 88.5 ± 21.0 90.2 ± 25.6 44.7 ± 31.6 46.4 ± 6.5 T max (hour) 0.25 ± 0 1.0 ± 0.87 0.58 ± 0.38 2.3 ± 1.5
However, the most striking result is the difference in behavior between the aqueous solution and non-aqueous PEG400 solution formulations of naproxen (Fig. 7 ). Both aqueous and PEG400 solution formulations resulted in similar overall AUC when dosed subcutaneously, suggesting that the overall absorption of naproxen from both formulations was similar. However, the PEG400 solution formulation had a significantly lower C max and longer T max compared to the aqueous solution formulation. The variability in the data for the PEG400 formulations is relatively low as well, suggesting that no unanticipated events such as precipitation were occurring at the injection site. Instead, the slower T max may be related to the higher viscosity of the formulation and is consistent with the slower rate of diffusion observed and predicted by the in vitro gel release assay. This effect has been noted before with formulations using PEG400 and demonstrates the effect that excipients can play on drug formulations ( , , ). Fig. 7 Comparison of the pharmacokinetic profiles of aqueous and PEG400 solution formulations of naproxen when dosed subcutaneously in rat
As a result, the in vitro behavior of the small-molecule naproxen formulations in the gel diffusion assay is consistent and predictive of the in vivo bioperformance in preclinical species. The gel diffusion assay is thus capable of distinguishing the effects of various aspects of the formulation such as behavior of suspensions as well as the influence excipients can have on formulation performance in these model systems. A qualitative and relative understanding of the potential differences in the performance of various formulations can be understood, which can allow for rapid formulation prioritization and optimization.
CONCLUSION
The optimization process for formulation development requires appropriate in vitro models for predicting bioperformance. For formulations intended for subcutaneous injection, this necessitates the development of new release assays that more closely model the tissue environment encountered by the formulation after injection. This typically includes an extracellular matrix consisting of a gel phase rather than bulk fluid. We have demonstrated that a convenient in vitro release model consisting of agarose gels can be used for parenteral formulation optimization and to predict the in vivo behavior of various formulations of insulin, a large peptide, and naproxen, a small molecule. This assay realistically embeds the formulation within the gel phase and then analyzes the rate of diffusion and release of the drug molecule in a convenient, automated manner. The resulting data can be collected on a continuous, real-time basis, resulting in a large number of data points that can be used to clearly differentiate the qualitative behavior of different formulations. This streamlined approach can thus be used to facilitate rapid formulation optimization. Future work will explore more physiologically relevant gel phases ( e.g. , collagen and hyaluronic acid scaffolds) and to improve the in vitro – in vivo relationships (IVIVR) between the gel diffusion assay with in vivo bioperformance.