INTRODUCTION
Nanosizing is a promising drug delivery approach to improve the bioavailability of poorly soluble drugs, especially for those molecules showing a dissolution rate dependent performance ( ). High pressure homogenization (HPH) and wet ball milling (WBM) are currently the two most frequently used methods to produce drug nanosuspensions. Thereby, the effectiveness of the particle size reduction is influenced by several factors. Various physico-chemical properties of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), such as the crystalline state, Young’s modulus, the crystal size, and the density determine the required time for producing small nanocrystals when a certain type of equipment is used ( ). Furthermore, the abovementioned API properties do also play a significant role in minimizing particle size ( , , ).
In principle, there are two ways to improve the effectiveness of a size reduction process: (1) utilization of a milling system with better size reduction capability or (2) changing the API properties in order to improve the millability and thereby reducing the milling time ( ).
The H 42 process, as a typical two-step technology, uses the latter principle. It belongs to the combinative particle size reduction methods and comprises of a spray-drying step for improving the millability of an API and HPH for nanosizing the modified API. First, the drug is dissolved in an appropriate organic solvent, and then, it is spray-dried in order to obtain a modified API powder. The modified drug powder has altered physico-chemical properties, which makes it better susceptible for the size reduction forces generated by using standard HPH equipment to produce nanosuspensions. Some studies have been reported which confirm that the process results in small particle sizes by applying even less homogenization cycles as compared to standard HPH ( , ). This means that the millability of a drug can be truly improved after the spray-drying process. However, the reason behind this improved performance is still not fully understood yet. The modified APIs show some altered physical-chemical properties such as a modified solid state and a change in powder morphology. Previous studies showed that spray-dried glibenclamide with a very low degree of crystallinity seemed to yield the smallest particle size in nanosuspension. Interestingly, the same trend was observed by HPH of freeze-dried glibenclamide with reduced crystallinity ( ). A hypothesis based on this was proposed that modified APIs with a reduced crystallinity or even a fully amorphous APIs might be beneficial to improve the effectiveness of particle size reduction during the HPH process.
Amorphous APIs are characterized by random molecule orientations and the absence of a three-dimensional long-range order, which result in different physical properties, e.g., solubility, density, viscosity, and stability, compared to the corresponding crystalline forms. Aspects such as physico-chemical properties and stability are studied in the context of amorphization of APIs ( , , ). However, reports about the millability of amorphous APIs are very rare.
Design of experiment (DoE) is a very efficient methodology to evaluate different process parameters simultaneously. The optimization effect can be rapidly and accurately predicted by the corresponding software ( , ). In addition, an interaction between factors and the correlation with the responses can be quantitatively identified by applying DoE principles ( ). Previous studies exploring the H 42 process demonstrated that a modification of the drug’s solid state could be achieved by adjusting the concentrations of API and surfactant in organic solvents for spray-drying. Moreover, this APIs/surfactant ratio was identified as a significant factor for obtaining certain particle sizes of hydrocortisone acetate nanocrystals ( ) as well as glibenclamide nanocrystals ( ).
Resveratrol, a natural phenol derived from grapes and some other fruits, is known to have diverse physiological activites, such as antioxidant properties, anti-inflammatory activities, and potential cancer chemopreventive properties ( , ). However, the low bioavailability of resveratrol has been confirmed by previous studies. The rapid metabolism and the poor aqueous solubility could be possible reasons ( ).
In a previous study by Kobierski et al., standard HPH was applied to produce resveratrol nanocrystals for dermal administration. Relatively large particle sizes (laser diffractometry diameter, d 99% 2.5–3.8 μm) were found for nanosuspensions stabilized by different surfactants even after 30 homogenization cycles ( ). This demonstrated the limitation of standard HPH for this specific API. It can be expected that a smaller particle size of resveratrol would lead to better bioavailability.
The aim of this study was to systematically investigate and optimize the H 42 technology by applying the DoE methodology. The influences of the solid state as well as other physical properties of spray-dried resveratrol on the minimal achievable particle sizes have been investigated. Furthermore, it was assessed whether the H 42 process with optimized process parameter would result in much smaller particle sizes compared to standard HPH.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Resveratrol was purchased from Denk Feinchemie GmbH (Munich, Germany), sodium cholate from Sigma-Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany), and ethanol from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Ultra-purified water was provided by a Milli-Q water system (Millipore GmbH, Schwalbach, Germany) and was used as dispersion medium.
Methods
Design of Experiment (DoE)
Previous studies relying on the H 42 process could prove that the API concentration and the API to surfactant ratio used during the spray-drying step are the two most important factors for achieving the smallest particle sizes after the HPH step ( ). Therefore, it was not necessary to perform another screening experiment in order to identify the most relevant factors in the course of this study. The resveratrol concentration and the sodium cholate percentage (relative to resveratrol) were selected as key factors for a central composite circumscribed (CCC) design. Two sets of experiments have been performed in this study. The first DoE trial was created based on the solubility of resveratrol in ethanol. This was used as test phase to identify the practical limitation of the key factors (API concentration and API to surfactant ratio). The second DoE trial was created based on the results of the first set of experiments. It was performed in a response surface fashion in order to calculate the optimal conditions. Laser diffractometry diameter ( d (0.9)) representing the largest remained particle size was chosen as response value. Commercially available Minitab ® 15 software was used for the experimental planning as well as for the evaluation of the data.
Resveratrol Modification
Resveratrol and sodium cholate were dissolved in ethanol at various ratios as calculated by using the DoE software. Spray-drying was performed using a mini spray dryer B-290 equipped with an inert loop system B-295 (Büchi Labortechnik AG, Switzerland). The organic solutions were spray-dried with a feeding rate of approx. 4 ml/min. The inlet temperature was set to 105°C, resulting in an outlet temperature of 72 to 74°C. The rotameter representing the spraying air flow was adjusted to 35 mm and the aspirator rate was set to 80%. A two-fluid nozzle was used, and the level of automatic nozzle cleaning was 2 to avoid clogging of the nozzle.
High Pressure Homogenization (HPH)
Unmodified resveratrol and spray-dried powders, respectively, were dispersed at different concentrations into sodium cholate solutions to ensure an identical concentration of resveratrol (1.0%, w / w ) and sodium cholate (1.1%, w / w ) for all prepared suspensions. The microsuspensions were firstly mixed with a Ultra-Turrax T25 disperser equipped with a S25N-18G dispersing element (IKA-Werke GmbH & Co. KG, Germany) for 1 min at 8000 rpm. HPH was performed by using a Micron Lab 40 homogenizer (APV Deutschland GmbH, Germany). A water jacket was used for temperature control. Premilling (2 cycles at 500 bar, 1 cycle at 1,000 bar) was performed in the beginning followed by 20 homogenization cycles at 1500 bar to produce the final nanosuspensions at 5°C. Samples were collected and analyzed for their particle sizes after 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 cycles of homogenization at 1500 bar, respectively.
Powder X-ray Diffraction (PXRD)
The solid states of spray-dried powders and the unmodified powder were evaluated by using wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS). A Philips X-ray generator PW 1830 equipped with a copper cathode (Philips Industrial & Electro-Acoustic Systems Division, The Netherlands) was employed to create the PXRD (or WAXS) patterns. The diffraction angle range was set between 0.6 and 40° 2theta (2 θ ) with a step size of 0.04° per second.
Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC)
DSC was also used to analyze the solid state of all samples (spray-dried powders and unmodified powder). The measurements were performed with a Mettler DSC 821 e (Mettler Toledo, Germany). The heating range was performed in a range between 25 and 300°C at a heating rate of 10°C/min under a nitrogen purge of 80 ml/min. Before each measurement, about 1–2 mg sample powder was accurately weighed into a standard aluminum pan of 40 μl. An empty pan was used as reference. A small pinhole was made at each pan lid.
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)
The particle morphologies of unmodified resveratrol and spray-dried powder were characterized by a scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi S-520, Japan). The powders were placed on carbon tapes and then sputter coated with gold. The gold thickness was 22–25 nm. All the SEM images were taken using a working distance of 10 mm. The scanning was performed at 15 kV using secondary electron mode.
Photon Correlation Spectroscopy (PCS)
A Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments, UK) was used to measure the mean intensity-weighted particle size (z-average) and the polydispersity index (PdI) as the width of size distribution for each nanosuspension obtained. Each nanosuspension sample of 50 μl was diluted in 3 ml Milli-Q water for 10 measurement runs in triplicate. The measurement temperature was 25°C.
Laser Diffractometry (LD)
The particle sizes and the particle size distributions were measured by LD using a Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments, UK). Three measurement runs were applied for each sample. Diameters d (0.5) and d (0.9) were recorded for each nanosuspension sample. A volume-based diameter d (0.5) or d (0.9) reflects that 50 or 90% of the particles are below the given size. A real refractive index of 1.69 and an imaginary refractive index of 0.02 were used for the data calculation ( ).
RESULTS AND DISSCUSION
Identification of the Limitation for DoE Key Factors
According to previous studies reported for the H 42 process, only the API concentration and the surfactant percentage used for the spray-drying step were confirmed as the two key factors ( ). Therefore, the resveratrol concentration and the sodium cholate percentage (relative to resveratrol) were selected as the process variables in this study.
A first set of experiments was conducted as test phase to identify the practical (experimental) limitations when varying these two factors (Fig. 1a ). The PXRD pattern of point 4 showed only amorphous halo (data not shown). The patterns of other points were still comparable to the unmodified resveratrol. DSC curves also confirmed the PXRD results. Therefore, only at point 4 a highly reduced crystallinity was found. A second set of experiments was conducted according to an adopted new DoE matrix (Fig. 1b ). In this case, the central point was set at 1% of resveratrol and 50% of sodium cholate (relative to the resveratrol weighing). Fig. 1 a DoE matrix used for test phase. b DoE matrix used for response surface. Percentage below RVT means concentration ( w / w ) of resveratrol in ethanol for spray-drying; value below SC means percentage of sodium cholate relative to resveratrol. Experiment number is from 1 to 9
Effect of Modification Step on Solid State of Resveratrol
Figure 2a shows the PXRD patterns of all spray-dried powders processed according to the second DoE matrix, unmodified resveratrol, and sodium cholate. A crystalline solid state of unmodified resveratrol was confirmed according to the obtained pattern. For DoE points 3, 4, 6 and 9, only amorphous halos without reflection peaks were found. A reduced intensity of the characteristic resveratrol peaks (2 θ of 16.24, 19.04, 22.24, 23.48, and 28.20) ( ) compared to unmodified resveratrol was found for the other DoE points 1, 2, 5, 7, and 8. That means those samples had a reduced crystallinity compared to the starting material but were not fully amorphous. Fig. 2 Results of a PXRD and b DSC of spray-dried powders (DoE points 1–9 of Fig. 1b ), unmodified resveratrol, and sodium cholate. See legend at right
Figure 2b shows the DSC curves of spray-dried powders (DoE points 1–9 of Fig. 1b ), unmodified resveratrol, and sodium cholate. Only one sharp melting peak with a melting point at 266.95°C was found for the unmodified resveratrol DSC curve, which confirmed the PXRD results. A lower melting point compared to unmodified resveratrol was found for all spray-dried powders. This phenomenon might result from the co-spray-dried sodium cholate. The DSC curves of the DoE points 1, 2, and 8 were comparable. In all cases, a reduced enthalpy compared to unmodified resveratrol with melting points between 241 and 246°C were found. Glass transition events, an exothermic peak, and a very small endothermic peak as shown in DoE points 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9 indicated a significant reduction of the crystallinity. The corresponding PXRD patterns of these samples were also showing only a very low intensity of peaks or were even completely amorphous halos.
Particle Morphologies of Unmodified Resveratrol and Spray-Dried Powders
Figure 3 shows the particle morphology of unmodified resveratrol, and Fig. 4 shows the particle morphologies of the spray-dried powders (DoE points 1–9 in Fig. 1b ). Unlike unmodified resveratrol, spherical particles were found after spray-drying for almost all modified samples (except for DoE point 1). A smooth surface of the particles was observed for the DoE points 3, 4, 6, and 9, representing conditions with high sodium cholate percentage (50.0–85.4%) during spray-drying. These four samples showed amorphous halos during the PXRD assessments. The particle morphology was highly dependent upon the crystalline nature of the material being dried ( ). One possible reason is that the increased ratio of sodium cholate during spray-drying process changed the aggregation behavior of the resveratrol crystals during the drying processes and consequently modified the final particle morphology. Another hypothesis is that the sodium cholate coated the resveratrol crystals when its ratio became higher and made the sphere smoother. Fig. 3 SEM picture of unmodified resveratrol (scale bar 8 μm, magnification ×3000) Fig. 4 SEM pictures of the spray-dried powders (DoE points 1–9 in Fig. 1b ), scale bar 8 μm, magnification ×3000
Characterization of Nanosuspensions
Figure 5 shows the particle sizes of nanosuspensions after 20 homogenization cycles produced in the second set of experiments. The points 2 and 7 resulted in the smallest particle size with d (0.5) value of 201 nm for point 2 and 204 nm for point 7, respectively. In contrast, the largest particle sizes were measured for the samples point 3 and point 6, 333 and 335 nm, respectively. The d (0.9) value of point 3 (3.601 μm) was around five times larger than the smallest d (0.9) size of point 2 (0.690 μm) and point 7 (0.736 μm). In addition, the largest z-average of PCS was also point 3, which was identical to the LD measurements. Fig. 5 LD and PCS particle sizes of nanosuspensions (DoE points 1–9 of Fig. 1b ) after 20 homogenization cycles
Interestingly, the modified resveratrol powders of DoE points 3, 4, 5, 6, and 9, which were substantially amorphous, yielded much larger particle sizes (both z-average and d (0.9)) than the other samples. This phenomenon was contrary to the hypothesis that the smallest particle size can be obtained when nanosizing an amorphous API. Amorphous solid states of resveratrol powder have not shown any advantage in the case of this particular H 42 study. In addition, spray-dried DoE points 3, 4, 5, 6, and 9 powders consisted of spherical particles with a very smooth surface. However, just those spray-dried powders with a rough particle surface and a predominately crystalline solid state showed better particle size reduction trends as result of the HPH process.
The influence of the API concentration at the same resveratrol to sodium cholate ratio has also been investigated. As is shown in Fig. 1b , the DoE points 5, 6, and 7 had the same sodium cholate to resveratrol percentage (50.0%), which means that these spray-dried powders possessed exactly the same proportion of resveratrol to sodium cholate, i.e., 1:0.50. The only difference was the total solid content of the spray-drying solution. Comparing these three particle sizes, the smallest size was achieved for DoE point 7, which was spray-dried using the lowest resveratrol concentration (0.3%), while the highest resveratrol concentration (1.7%) for point 6 resulted in the largest particle size of these three samples. The same trend was found for other comparable pairs, such as points 1 and 2, which possessed the same resveratrol:sodium cholate ratio (1: 0.25) and the pair of points 3 and 4 (resveratrol:sodium cholate, 1:0.75). As a result, it can be stated that a lower resveratrol concentration during spray-drying yielded modified API powders with better millability.
The Use of a Response Surface Model for Optimization
The correlation between API-surfactant ratio during spray-drying (explanatory variables) and obtained particle size in nanosuspension (response variable) was further evaluated by applying a response surface methodology. Figure 6 shows the prediction profiler (A) and the response surface (B) for d (0.9) diameters in response to a variation of the factors resveratrol concentration and sodium cholate percentage. The diagram shows that both a low API concentration and a low excipient to API percentage in the solvent are required for obtaining the smallest particle size in nanosuspension. Fig. 6 a Prediction profiler and b response surface for particle size LD ( d (0.9)) in function of API concentration and excipient percentage. Size: d (0.9) (nm), API: resveratrol (%, w / w ), Excip: sodium cholate (%, relative to API)
Based on the results of response surface methodology input variables, the optimized factors for achieving the smallest particle size after HPH could be predicted as follows: 0.5% of resveratrol and 14.6% of sodium cholate to resveratrol. Theoretically, HPH of this optimized resveratrol powder should result in a predicted LD ( d (0.9)) diameter of 301 nm. This predicted size had a desirability of 0.979, which was quite close to the ideal value of 1.
Interestingly, this optimized API to excipient ratio (1:0.146) during spray-drying was similar to previous studies using the H 42 technology. For example, the best ratio was 9:1 in the case of hydrocortisone acetate/poloxamer 188 ( ) and a similar optimized value was 10:1 for glibenclamide/docusate sodium ( ). Therefore, it seems that a low ratio of surfactant relative to API during spray-drying, i.e., around 10:1 (API:excipient), is preferred for the purpose of producing a homogeneously dispersed nanosuspension. The similarity of these phenomena needs to be further verified.
Confirmation Experiment
Figure 7 shows the DSC and the PXRD results of the predicted best point compared to unmodified resveratrol. A reduced melting point for optimized sample was found in DSC curve. This might result from the co-spray-dried sodium cholate. Although the peak intensity in PXRD of the optimized powder was lower than that of unmodified resveratrol, a predominately crystalline solid state was confirmed for this particular resveratrol powder. Again, the optimized sample used during the HPH step in this study was proven to be predominately crystalline and not amorphous. This was contrary to that initial hypothesis that amorphous API or at least a distinct reduced crystallinity would be favorable for achieving a small particle size after the HPH step. Several possible reasons might contribute to the results of resveratrol in this study, which is contrary to the existing glibenclamide study ( ). Amorphization of resveratrol could only be obtained by adding sodium cholate in this study. However, it is confirmed that the reduced crystallinity of glibenclamide could be generated without using any excipient by methods such as spray-drying ( ), freeze-drying ( ), and ball milling ( ). Therefore, the mechanism for generation of the amorphizations might be different between these two APIs. This may lead to different API physical properties (hardness, particle morphology, and crystallite size) and consequently affect the drug milling properties. Amorphization could result from molecular irregular arrangement or sometimes reduced crystal size. When the crystal sizes are sufficiently small, a reduced crystallinity or even amorphization might be also observed with some analytical methods such as powder X-ray diffraction ( ). Some bottom-up processes such as the spray-drying process also has the capability to induce reduced crystal size ( ). Considering the different physical properties and amorphization methods for these two APIs, therefore, a more detailed study would be essential to recognize the differences during drug amorphization processes in the future. Fig. 7 a DSC curves and b PXRD patterns of the optimized resveratrol sample ( black color ) and unmodified resveratrol ( grey color )
Figure 8 and Table I shows a comparison of the particle size reduction effectiveness when using either the optimized modified powder (0.5% of resveratrol and 14.6% of sodium cholate) or unmodified resveratrol. After only 1 homogenization cycle, the mean particle size could be reduced to 227 nm when optimized resveratrol was used. In addition, this optimized sample showed the smallest particle size ( d (0.9)) of 423 nm after 20 homogenization cycles. This result was relatively close to the predicted size of 301 nm and thus confirmed the prediction according to the response surface methodology. In contrast, a d (0.9) size of 1.8 μm was obtained after 20 homogenization cycles when the HPH process was carried out using unmodified resveratrol. Therefore, it can be stated that the minimal achievable particle size was significantly reduced by using the H 42 process compared to standard HPH. Fig. 8 Comparison of particle size reduction of unmodified resveratrol (uRVT) and the optimized resveratrol (oRVT) sample as a function of HPH cycle (cyc) numbers. Break at LD size axis is from 1 to 2 μm Table I Comparison of PCS Z-Average of the Unmodified Resveratrol (uRVT) and Optimized Resveratrol (oRVT) as a Function of HPH Cycle Cycle number of HPH PCS z-average of uRVT [nm] PCS z-average of oRVT [nm] 1 1348 227 5 732 195 10 684 194 15 593 195 20 569 193
Figure 8 also shows that there was almost no change of the mean particle size reduction after 5 homogenization cycles for the modified sample, which means that 5 to 10 homogenization cycles can be regarded as sufficient when this spray-dried powder is used. Therefore, it was again confirmed that the particle size reduction effectiveness is distinctly improved when the H 42 process is used.
Table II shows the nanocrystal stability results of the optimized sample within 12 months. Both LD and PCS data confirmed that there was no obvious particle size increase after 1 year, which means this H42 technology could produce resveratrol nanosuspension with long time stability. Table II Stability of Optimized Resveratrol (oRVT) Nanosuspension LD (d0.5) [μm] LD (d0.9) [μm] PCS z-average [nm] 0 day 0.146 0.423 193 6 months 0.157 0.476 202 12 months 0.159 0.472 193
CONCLUSION
The combinative particle size technology H 42 was systematically investigated and optimized by applying DoE principles. Both predominately amorphous and predominately crystalline samples were produced when spray-drying was conducted depending on which resveratrol concentration and which sodium cholate percentage was applied. Interestingly, the smallest particle size was achieved by using predominately crystalline powder instead of amorphous API. This result was in contrast to the previous studies. This study has revealed that a reduced crystallinity or an amorphous solid state is not always beneficial for achieving smaller particle sizes after HPH. The application of the DoE methodology enables an identification of optimized parameters for the API modification step in a very efficient manner. A homogenous nanosuspension with a particle size d (0.5) of 146 nm and d (0.9) of 423 nm could be produced after 20 homogenization cycles by using modified resveratrol powder produced according to these optimized parameters. This was much smaller than the achieved particle sizes ( d (0.5) 280 nm, d (0.9) 1800 nm) when nanosizing unmodified resveratrol. Finally, it was confirmed that only five homogenization cycles were sufficient for achieving a maximum dispersity of the nanosuspension when the H 42 technology was used. The particle size reduction effectiveness was highly improved via this combination technology. Overall, this H 42 technology was capable to produce very small resveratrol nanocrystals within less homogenization cycles.