INTRODUCTION
β-Carotene is one of a group of red, orange, and yellow pigments called carotenoids. β-Carotene and other carotenoids provide approximately 50% of the vitamin A needed in the diet . β-Carotene can be found in fruits, vegetables, and whole grains ( , , , , ). The property to scavenge free radicals makes β-carotene a very suitable dietary supplement in various chronic diseases which involve production of free radicals ( ). It needs to be protected from exposure to heat and light because any changes in chemical structure of β-carotene such as cyclization, double-bond migration, and addition of oxygen molecule, definitely results in loss of its biological action. This fact has led to investigation of an efficient delivery system for enrichment of antioxidant activity as food formulation ( ).
Emergence of controlled-release systems such as microencapsulation has been explored to improve the temporal and spatial presentation of bioactive molecule in the body. Not limited to this, encapsulation does stabilize the sensitivity of bioactive compounds; it protects them from physiological degradation or elimination and delivers them to the desired site of action while minimizing their exposure elsewhere in the body ( , ).
Microcapsules (MCs) can be prepared using various encapsulation techniques which allows protection of bioactive materials from adverse effects of the atmospheric as well as physiological conditions. MC size ranges from 1 to 1000 μm ( , ). Microencapsulation crafts a microenvironment inside the capsule able to regulate the interactions between the external part and the internal one which ensure protection of sensitive food components against nutritional loss, offer controlled release, mask the bitter taste, and preserves fragrance. Reactive, sensitive, and volatile additives can be stabilized through microencapsulation ( , ). However, a variety of methods exists to prepare MCs via microencapsulation technology such as solvent evaporation method ( ), simple/complex coacervation ( ), spray drying ( ), fluidized bed coating ( ), electrohydrodynamic atomization (EHDA) methods ( ), and encapsulation into bubble systems ( ). But complex coacervation (CC) is widely used for delivery of bioactives in vivo because of low cost and rapid formulation time ( ) compared with spray drying as a production cost of one batch is higher in spray drying than complex coacervation.
Natural polymers such as casein (CA) and guar gum (GG) have attained special attention as they are edible, nontoxic, biodegradable ( ), and incompatible with each other above pH 6.0. Due to the wide range of desirable features and applications of protein-polysaccharide blends, the interest in identifying the thermodynamic compatibility between these biopolymers has been rapidly growing with aims to improve the quality, textural stability, and nutritive value of innovative products in the food, cosmetics, and pharmaceutical industries.
A number of synthetic cross-linking agents have been used such as glutaraldehyde, ethylene glycol, formaldehyde, and tripolyphosphate to increase the stability and shelf life of MCs. But recent studies have proven that synthetic cross-linking agents are more or less cytotoxic in nature. Thus, a natural cross-linking agent genipin was introduced in the present work, extracted from gardenia fruits which is 10,000 times less toxic than glutaraldehyde ( ). It is expected that genipin may replace glutaraldehyde in the future for facile production of stable and biocompatible cross-linked products ( ).
Over the last few decades, various studies have been reported for the encapsulation of various micronutrients including β-carotene. There are many encapsulation approaches which involve mixture of different matrices such as kappa carrageenan-carboxymethyl cellulose, whey protein isolate-alginate-chitosan ( ), tapioca starch maltodextrin ( ), furcellaran ( ), and alginate-chitosan ( ), which have been employed to improve the physicochemical properties of β-carotene. However, there are no studies reported on β-carotene-loaded MCs which were prepared by complex coacervation technique using CA-GG blend. This article is the first of its kind that provides an insight into the use of CA and GG to encapsulate the β-carotene using complex coacervation technique and cross-linked by genipin. Overall focus of the present study was to encapsulate the β-carotene compound using CA-GG blend forming a shell membrane around its surface, to overcome sensitivity of β-carotene towards light. However, it is such a subject that stimulates the interest of pharmaceutical and food industry for microencapsulation involving these materials. Thus, present research offers an alternative direction for microencapsulation of photosensitive neutraceuticals.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
β-Carotene (molar mass, 536.8726 g/mol), genipin (molar mass, 226.226 g/mol), 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), and 2,2′-azino-bis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid) (ABTS) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO 63146 (USA) where CA was supplied by Central Drug House (P) Ltd., New Delhi, India, and GG was obtained from Loba Chemie Ltd., Mumbai, India. Double refined soya oil (Fortune Edible Oils and Food) was purchased from local market of Chandigarh, India. All other reagents such as methanol, ethylacetate, acetonirtile, and glacial acetic acid were of analytical grade and purchased from Merck, Mumbai, India. Double-distilled water was used throughout the study and dialysis bag (MWCO, 14 kDa) used for in vitro release was purchased from HiMedia Laboratories, Mumbai, India.
Preparation of MCs by Complex Coacervation
Following steps were taken for the encapsulation of β-carotene via complex coacervation process.
Preparation of Protein and Polysaccharide Stock Solution
Initially, 1.0 g of CA was dissolved in 10 ml of 0.5 N sodium hydroxide (to increase the solubility of CA at pH 9) and then its volume was made up to 100 ml using distilled water. Meanwhile, GG solutions were prepared in different concentrations (0.05, 0.1, 0.25, and 0.5%) with an amount of 0.05, 0.1, 0.25, and 0.5 g, respectively, in 100 ml of distilled water.
Preparation of β-Carotene Oily Emulsion in Casein
Twenty-five milligrams of β-carotene was dissolved in 4 ml of soya oil using magnetic stirring (REMI, India) until β-carotene was solubilized completely (approximately 15 min). Soya oil containing β-carotene was added to 1.0% ( w / v ) CA solution, and the mixture was homogenized using a speed homogenizer (Remi Elektrotechnik Limited, India) under 9000 rpm for 30 min at 40 ± 1°C, to obtain an oil-in-water (O/W) emulsion. Subsequently, previously heated GG solution (40 ± 1°C) was added slowly into the O/W emulsion with continuous stirring to obtain the respective ratios of CA-GG blend.
Lowering of pH Using Glacial Acetic Acid
The pH of the entire emulsion system was lowered by dropwise addition of 10% ( v / v ) glacial acetic acid until a pH of 5 was obtained. At this pH, both biopolymers possessed equivalent surface charge and interacted yielding neutrally charged coacervates or MCs (Fig. 1 ). The MCs prepared with respective ratios of CA and GG were coded as G-1 (CA:GG = 1:0.05), G-2 (CA:GG = 1:0.1), G-3 (CA:GG = 1:0.25), and G-4 (CA:GG = 1:0.5). Fig. 1 Schematic representation of complex coacervation process using Casein and Guar Gum mix
Cross Linking of MC Shell Membrane
The colloidal dispersion containing MCs were kept in an ice bath for 20 min until its temperature lowered down to 10 ± 1°C. Subsequently, 500 μl of 0.5% ( w / v ) solution cross-linking agent, i.e., genipin ( ) was added with simultaneous stirring for 45 min to cross link the shell membranes of MCs. After the separation of MCs via filtration through Whatman filter paper (Grade 1; Fisher Scientific, India), MCs were freeze dried (Christ Alpha 2-4 LDplus, UK) for 48 h. Prior to freeze drying, the samples were kept in petri dishes and stored in a deep freezer at −80°C overnight. During the freeze drying, the pressure of the system was 0.0098 mbar. MCs were stored in amber-colored air-tight container for further investigation.
Physiochemical Characterization of MCs
Optimization of Biopolymer Concentration as Wall Materials Using Zeta Potential-Yield Stress Phenomenon
The effect of biopolymer concentration on MCs membrane function (rigidity and stability) was examined using zeta potential-yield stress phenomenon. In systematic manner, zeta potential measurements were performed during the microencapsulation process using Dynamic Light Scattering Zetasizer (DLS Zetasizer Nano ZS-90, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK) with an electric field of 15.24 V/cm at 25 ± 0.1°C and at a fixed 90° angle. Emulsions of different pH values were taken in polystyrene latex cuvettes and scanned to measure the zeta potential of emulsions with pH ranging from 5 to 9.
Rheological properties accompanying the yield stress were determined at 25 ± 1°C under steady shear flow using a controlled-stress modular compact rheometer (Rheoplus MCR 102, Anton Paar GmbH, Austria) with a cone plate fixture (75 mm diameter and 0.149 mm gap) and a Peltier system for temperature control (±0.01°C) using Rheoplus software, version 3.62 (Anton Paar GmbH, Germany). In the tested shear rate range, the torque values were within the specifications of rheometer (>0.1 μ Nm) ( ) .
A graph showing shear stress vs. shear rate was obtained; the values were used for Eq. 1 , where the Hershel-Bulkley model was used to determine the yield stress value exhibited by each formulation ( ). $$ \tau =\tau \mathrm{o}+ K\times {\gamma}^n $$ (1)
where τ is the shear stress (Pa), τ o represents yield stress (Pa), γ is shear rate (s −1 ), K is the consistency index, and n represent the flow behavior index.
A plot was then constructed between zeta potential (mV; y 1 ), yield stress (Pa; y 2 ), and pH ( x ) to determine the optimized concentration of protein-polysaccharide blend in respect to zeta potential (pH 5) with yield stress values of MCs (pH 5).
Percentage Yield
The total quantity of MCs was weighed, and percentage yield was calculated using Eq. ( 2 ) by taking into account the total weight of protein, oil, and polysaccharide ( ) . $$ \%\mathrm{Yield}=\frac{M_{\mathrm{a}}}{M_{\mathrm{b}}}\times 100 $$ (2)
where M a represents the amount of lyophilized MCs and M b denotes theoretical amount considering weight of CA, β-carotene oil, and GG.
Particle Size, Shape, and Surface Morphology
The particle size of MCs was checked by laser diffraction particle size analyzer Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments, UK). Briefly, MC dispersion was diluted 100 times with purified water. Prior to analysis, samples were sonicated in bath sonicator (Ultrasonicator PCI, Mumbai, India), at 50 Hz for 1 min and then analyzed in terms of distribution of average particles. Whole analysis was examined in triplicates.
The shape and surface morphology of MCs was examined by scanning electron microscopic study (JSM-6100 Digital SEM, Jeol Corporation limited Japan). Initially, powdered MCs were sprinkled on a double adhesive tape which was stuck on an aluminum stub. The stubs were then coated with gold to a thickness of about 300 Å by using a fine coat ion sputter coater (quorum technologies, Laughton, UK). All samples were examined under a scanning electron microscope (SEM) at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV and micrographs were taken in the range of ×100–2500 magnification.
FT-IR Spectroscopy Analysis
FT-IR spectra of CA, GG, and MCs were obtained at room temperature (28 ± 2°C) using dried samples using Perkin Elmer-400 FT-IR/FT-IR spectrophotometers in the range of 4000–400 cm −1 by running ten scans at 4 cm −1 . The MCs were characterized for FT-IR using the KBr pellet method after mixing a small amount of freeze-dried MCs with KBr and compressed under 25,000 psi to obtain a pellet. The results were measured from the peak intensity of ten scans with respect to frequency.
Percent Encapsulation Efficiency
Encapsulation efficiency was determined by the fraction of encapsulated oil over the total oil. Initially, 200 mg of powdered MCs was dispersed in 5 ml of ethyl acetate and vortexed (Vortex Shaker, Perfit, India) for 10 min at the regular interval of 5 min and then kept at rest for few hours to solubilize β-carotene at the surface of MCs in to an organic phase ( ). Concentration of β-carotene in non-encapsulated oil (oil surface ) was analyzed quantitatively using reverse-phase high-performance liquid chomatography (RP-HPLC, Schimazdu, Japan) in which column of C 18 (Luna ® , 5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm Phenomenex, Inc., USA) was used with an isocratic elution of mobile phase (methanol:acetonitrile:ethyl acetate = 80:10:10 ( v / v )). A flow rate of 2.0 ml/min was selected with a wavelength of 449 nm for detection by PDA detector. The entrapped oil was quantified by calculating the difference between the amount of oil loaded and the oil adsorbed at the surface of the MCs. Whole analysis was performed in triplicate. The following equation ( 3 ) was used to calculate the efficiency of encapsulation: $$ \%\mathrm{EE}=\frac{T_{\mathrm{a}}-{T}_{\mathrm{b}}}{T_{\mathrm{a}}}\times 100 $$ (3)
where T a is the total amount of β-carotene oil loaded and T b represents total amount β-carotene oil adsorbed on surface.
In Vitro Release Study
In vitro release study of β-carotene-loaded MCs was carried out by dialysis bag technique. In brief, an equivalent amount of 300 mg of MCs were dispersed in 5 ml of 0.1 N HCl (pH 1.2) as a release media containing 1% ( w / v ) sodium lauryl sulfate and the prepared suspension was then placed in a dialysis bag. The whole system was further submerged in conical flask that contained ethyl acetate of 20 ml as a test solution with constant stirring of 100 rpm at 37 ± 0.5°C. At designed intervals (0. 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 h), 1 ml of test aliquot was withdrawn and simultaneously replaced by fresh media ( ). Diffusion of core to the outer solution was assessed for β-carotene content with validated RP-HPLC method ( ) as described above.
Release Kinetics Study
The release of bioactive compound from the matrices may involve the various processes such as diffusion, erosion, leaching, and dissolution. Their release may follow mixed mechanism which can involve both diffusion and dissolution processes. In order to understand the mechanism of in vitro β-carotene release, the results of release study was fitted into various kinetic models, these included zero order (Eq. 4 ), first order (Eq. 5 ), Higuchi (Eq. 6 ), and Korseymer-Peppas (Eq. 7 ) model. The best-fit model of dissolution data were compared by their regression coefficient values obtained from curve of the models graph ( ). $$ {Q}_1{Q}_1={Q}_0{Q}_0+{k}_0\times t $$ (4) $$ \ln C= \ln {C}_0-{k}_1\times t $$ (5) $$ {Q}_t={K}_{\mathrm{H}}\times {t}^{1/2} $$ (6) $$ {Q}_t= a\times {t}^n $$ (7)
where Q t is an amount of bioactive compound dissolved in time t (h), Q 0 is an initial amount of bioactive compound in the solution, k 0 is the zero-order release constant, k 1 is first-order release constant, K H is the Higuchi dissolution constant, a is a constant incorporating structural and geometric characteristics of the bioactive compound, and n is the release exponent, indicative of the bioactive release mechanism.
Stability in Simulated GI Fluids
Lyophilized MCs were diluted with simulated gastric fluid (SGF, pH 1.2) and simulated intestinal fluid (SIF, pH 6.8), to assess their stability under different gut pH conditions which can influence their particle size and entrapment efficiency characteristics. This experiment somewhat emulates what would happen in GI fluid where the pH conditions might not necessarily be acidic enough for all the bioactive molecules to dissolve. SGF was prepared as described in the US Pharmacopeia ( ) and consists of 3.2 mg/mL pepsin in 0.03 M NaCl at pH 1.2 ( ). SIF was prepared as described in the US Pharmacopeia and consists of 10 mg/ml of pancreatin in 0.05 M KH 2 PO 4 , pH 6.8 ( ). In brief, 10 ml of SGF and SIF were separately added to a 2-ml suspension of freeze-dried MCs, and the mixture was allowed to incubate for 2 h in case of SGF (pH 1.2) and for 6 h for SIF (pH 6.8). Following the incubation, the particle size and entrapment efficiency of β-carotene in MCs were determined ( ).
Antioxidant Activity Determinations by DPPH and ABTS Methods
The radical scavenging activity of the free β-carotene and encapsulated structures was determined and compared according to the DPPH method as reported earlier in literature ( ). In concise manner, dried MCs and free β-carotene were diluted with methanol to prepare the test solutions (25–200 μg/ml). Two milliliters of test sample solution was mixed with 1 ml of 0.004% ( w / v ) DPPH in methanol and kept in the dark for 30 min. Similarly, control sample was prepared (without sample) to calculate the percentage of free radical scavenging activity (%RSA) and inhibitory concentration 50 (IC 50 ) value of the compound. The absorbance was measured at 516 nm using UV spectrophotometer (UV-PC 2400, Schimadzu, Japan) in comparison with ascorbic acid as a reference standard.
Similarly, ABTS radical scavenging activity was performed in accordance to the reported method with a slight modification ( ). The dried MCs and free β-carotene were diluted with methanol to prepare test solutions (5–30 μg/ml). Four hundred microliters of each test sample solution was mixed with 3.6 ml of the diluted ABTS solution (2.45 mM potassium persulfate was added into 7.0 mM ABTS in ratio 1:1 ( v / v ) and kept overnight at 30 ± 1°C in dark condition), meanwhile the control sample was prepared. The absorbance was measured at 734 nm using UV spectrophotometer in comparison with trolox as a reference standard.
The %RSA and IC 50 values of antioxidant compound in DPPH and ABTS methods were measured by using the following (Eqs. 8 and 9 ), and y = 50 was used to determine the value of x (μg/ml) as IC 50 in Eq. ( 9 ): $$ \%\mathrm{RSA}=\frac{\left(1-{A}_{\mathrm{s}}\right)}{A_{\mathrm{c}}}\times 100 $$ (8) $$ \mathrm{Regression}\ \mathrm{line}\ \mathrm{equation}:\kern0.5em y= m\times x+ c $$ (9)
where A s represents absorbance of sample, A c denotes absorbance of control, y represents the 50% radical scavenging activity, x is the IC 50 concentration (μg/ml), and c denotes the intercept obtained from the line equation.
Photolytic Degradation
Lyophilized MCs and free β-carotene were kept under UV chamber to get an intense exposure of UV rays of 30 W/(m 2 /h) intensity. Duplicate samples of dried MCs and free β-carotene were prepared, and β-carotene concentration was quantified with LC-MS technique under photolytic conditions. At regular time intervals (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 days), samples were withdrawn. To the samples of MCs, 1 ml of water and 2 ml of ethyl acetate was added and kept on rest (5–6 h) for complete extraction of β-carotene. The upper layer of the mixture, i.e., ethyl acetate containing β-carotene was collected into vials to assess the β-carotene content in comparison with fresh samples of free β-carotene and MCs. Each sample (20 μl) was analyzed in LC-MS (Waters, Micromass Q-TOF micro) was injected with same solvent as used in RP-HPLC method. Flow rate was set as 0.15 ml/min with positive mode electro spray ionization. Whole analysis was performed with capillary voltage of 3.0 kV, cone voltage 34 V, collision energy 15 eV, and desolvation temperature of 250°C. The mass spectra were scanned from 200 to 400 nm and compared with the National Institute of Standards and Technology Library Database to elucidate the structures of degraded products.
Statistical Analysis
The experimental data was processed and analyzed using Origin Pro 8 software (Origin lab Software Corp, Northampton, MA, USA) for zeta potential, encapsulation efficiency, release kinetics, and simulated stability study with triplicate analysis where the antioxidant activity, percentage yield, and photolytic degradation studies were done in duplicate and then subjected to ANOVA (one-way ANOVA). Statistical differences are denoted as p ≥ 0.05 (not significant (NS)), p ≤ 0.05 (significant), and p ≤ 0.001 (highly significant) ( ).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Preparation of MCs by Complex Coacervation
Coacervation is described as a phase-separation phenomenon of a homogeneous polymer solution into polymer-rich and polymer-poor phases. The procedure involves an emulsification followed by phase separation then cross linking of coacervates and lyophilization. In the present work, GG was added to CA at pH 9 and, after lowering of pH (5), phase separation was achieved, resulting in GG-CA encapsulating β-carotene. The reason for phase separation is often due to the segregative interaction between these biopolymers. At low pH values, the glucoside unit of GG contains a hydroxyl group which accepts the hydrogen ion donated by glacial acetic acid and becomes protonated with positive charge. The protonated hydroxyl ion binds with anionic molecules of CA through a strong H-bond leading to formation of shell membrane around oil droplets of β-carotene. Therefore, GG molecules get adsorbed on to the CA micelles thereby decreasing aggregation of CA micelles during acidification ( ). This phenomenon was commonly attributed to concentration-based presence of positive ions on GG molecules which had neutralized the anionic molecules of CA to form a neutral coacervate ( ). Genipin was added to rigidize the structure of MCs via amide bonds between the primary amino residues of CA. However, incomplete linkage between the shell membranes of each coacervate would lead to damage of matrix structure under drying conditions. Filtration was accompanied with washing of deionized water thrice to remove excess genipin.
Optimization of Biopolymer Concentration as Wall Material Using Zeta Potential-Yield Stress Phenomenon
The interaction of CA with different concentrations of GG was studied at all pH values for emulsions (9 to 5) ( ).Variation in ζ-potential at all pH of emulsions was observed during the process of coacervation. The different concentrations of O/W emulsions have exhibited a different mechanism of polyelectrolyte behavior with negative values at pH 9. In G-4 formulation, the negative charge was decreasing considerably as pH reached 5 while the rest of formulations (G-1, G-2, and G-3) did not attain an isoelectric point (IEP) or neutral value as shown in Fig. 2a . The decrease in negative values of ζ-potential was due to the charge compensation which occurred on a successful deposition of GG molecule in conjugation with CA molecules on the surface of β-carotene oil. At IEP, ions lead to stabilize the coacervate which was observed in G-4 MCs only. It was also observed that further addition of glacial acetic acid to the G-4 suspension did not bring any change in the ζ-potential values once it attained IEP. This might be due to failure of glacial acetic acid molecule to react with GG molecules, due to unavailability and incapability of GG molecules to undergo conformational reorganization at pH 5 where the rest of MCs (G-1, G-2, and G-3) has shown negative values of zeta potential on their surfaces. The negative values on the surface of MCs (G-1, G-2, and G-3) indicate the incomplete neutralization of CA anions with positive ions based on concentration of GG thus more susceptible to react with other solvents or agents during storage ( ). Fig. 2 a pH-mediated zeta potential (mV) of different combinations of CA-GG blend while lowering down the pH (9–5) using 10% GAA. Each data point represents the mean ± SD ( n = 3) . b Effect of GG concentration on yield stress and zeta potential of MCs at pH 5.0 to optimize the biopolymer concentration as wall material. Experiment was done in triplicate. All were the mean difference and significant at p ≤ 0.05 level. c SEM images of microcapsules (MCs) prepared from different combinations of CA-GG by complex coacervation
The effect of viscosity plays a crucial role in the preparation of MCs through coacervation process. The MCs containing different concentrations of biopolymers were studied in colloidal form under changing shear rate, γ (0.1–100 s −1 ) for determination of yield stress value ( ). From Eeq. ( 1 ), the yield stress value of each formulation at pH 5 was calculated. All four samples exhibited distinct yield stress values which manifested the difference in molecular structure of the MCs, which further affects the size, surface, and stability of the formulation. It was reported in the literature that higher yield stress values result in greater stability in solid state ( ).
The criterion followed to choose the zeta potential-yield stress value phenomenon was to establish a linear relationship between the electro kinetic property and rheological property of samples so that the optimal biopolymer concentration could be established ( ). From Fig. 2b , it was observed that maximum yield stress of 0.5% ( w / v ) GG concentration with 1% ( w / v ) CA has matched well with the isoelectric point. However, it was also demonstrated that when the concentration of GG was reduced, electrostatic force deviated from the isoelectric point (IEP), resistance in flow was minimized, and a decrease in viscosity and yield stress was observed ( ). This study further connects the relationship among EE, percentage yield of MCs, and the viscosity of the wall materials. From this relationship, it was observed that G-4 MCs might be the optimized formulation containing CA:GG in the ratio of 1:0.5 ( w / v ) with neutrality at the surface and maximum yield stress.
Percentage Yield
The ratio of wall materials may affect the balance of biopolymer surface charge and further yield of complex coacervate. Table I shows that G-4 MCs attained the highest yield compared with the others. According to previous reports, on increasing the concentration of GG while keeping the amount of CA 1% ( w / v ), the yield of MCs would increase ( ). The suggested mechanisms involve effective neutralization of CA molecules with GG molecules which leads to formation of more coacervates where an outcome of this was the separation of two phases. In upper phase, MCs accumulated near the liquid meniscus, while in the lower phase, clear solution was obtained which explicated that CA was completely bound to GG molecules. Hence, turbidity in lower phase was diminishing slowly with increasing GG concentration up to an optimum level of 0.5% ( w / v ). Table I Physiochemical Characterization of Microcapsules (MCs) of Varying Concentration of CA and GG Ratios of CA:GG Formulation code Percentage yield (%) Encapsulation efficiency (%) Particle size (μm) 1:0.05 G-1 66.04 a ± 0.38 57.05 a ± 6.64 170.76 a ± 4.87 1:0.10 G-2 66.93 b ± 0.44 62.6 b ± 3.68 180.43 b ± 3.09 1:0.25 G-3 70.11 c ± 0.36 63.16 c ± 1.04 165.83 c ± 5.93 1:0.5 G-4 71.34 d ± 0.55 65.95 d ± 5.33 176.47 d ± 4.65 Values are mean ± SD of samples analyzed individually in triplicate except for percentage yield done in duplicate. Different letters show significant differences among different combinations of formulation at p ≤ 0.05 levels
Particle Size, Surface Morphology, and Encapsulation Efficiency
Emulsification of β-carotene in CA-GG blend and subsequent formation of particles upon lowering the pH-generated microsized particles. The mean size of particles prepared from respective ratio of CA-GG loaded with β-carotene was statistically different among themselves. Their mean size was found to cover the permissible range of micron scale, i.e., 160–180 μm as reported in Table I .
Electron micrograph of MCs (Fig. 2c ) revealed that only G-4 MCs acquired the round shape with a smooth surface after lyophilization of coacervates, which is an initial characteristic of a stable coacervate. Addition of cross-linking agent reformed the shell membrane to establish strong and effective hydrogen bonds between the CA-GG membrane with core compound ( ). Further, we also observed that the sizes obtained by SEM are differing from those determined by Mastersizer. The difference in sizes attributed a fact that the SEM reveals the morphological size of the particle in the solid state; however, Mastersizer measures the hydrodynamic diameter of the particles in aqueous solutions. Our results are well in accordance with previous reports ( , ). As MCs were prepared from hydrocolloid materials, therefore swelling of coating material of MCs in aqueous dispersion might also be responsible for variation in particle size. Another reason might be due to the operation principal of both instruments while Mastersizer measured the average particle size while SEM measured the size of individual particles ( ).
Maximum percent encapsulation efficiency (EE) is a demanding and desirable feature for any formulation. This approach not only helps to prevent the loss of precious biological action of photosensitive materials but also helps to extend the time of action of bioactive compound ( ). Study of this physiochemical parameter has helped in ensuring the retention of β-carotene within the carrier system. The encapsulation efficiency was found maximum in G-4 formulation (CA and GG of 1 and 0.5% ( w / v )) enclosing β-carotene served by oil as a vehicle compared with others (Table I ). Substantial increase in EE was observed from 57.05 to 65.95% with increasing the GG concentration. This was possibly due to the increase of chain length of GG which produces a strong structural matrix of CA-GG to entrap β-carotene oil more strongly. Thus, protein-linked polysaccharide chain accumulated at the air/water interface of the oil droplets while reducing the solution pH and appeared on the surface of the particles in the form of complex deposition ( ).
FT-IR Spectroscopy Analysis
Figure 3 (a–c) depicts FT-IR spectra of CA, GG, and MCs. Major regions of the FT-IR spectrum of CA (Fig. 3 (a)) possess absorption peaks at 3435 cm −1 , thereby confirming the presence of free amine groups, and 2924 cm −1 determined the –C–H stretch in aromatic rings whereas the presence of carbonyl group in the structure is being confirmed by an absorption band at 1745 cm −1 , primary amine group with N–H bending ensured by the presence of an absorption band at 1639 cm −1 , a broad and medium intensity peak at 1535 cm −1 suggested the existence of –C–C stretch in the ring, and aliphatic amines with –C–N stretch groups attached at different positions in globular chain of protein was observed at 1164 cm −1 ( ). The O–H groups in GG can also participated in hydrogen bonding, and its stretching vibration is located at 3009 cm −1 . In addition, the –COOH group can be cross linked with –NH 2 functional group of casein protein via hydrogen bond, which constructs the structure of microspheres and plays a stabilizing role. Moreover, symmetrical and asymmetrical vibrations of –C=O group was observed at 1074 and 1025 cm −1 in Fig. 3 (b) ( ). Fig. 3 FT-IR spectra of a CA, b GG, and c MCs
The FT-IR spectrum of drug-loaded freeze-dried MCs is shown in Fig. 3 (c). A broad and strong stretching band at 3400 cm −1 was observed as shifting peak of CA and GG (3435 and 3399 cm −1 ), suggesting a linkage bond formed as amide group formation in the shell membrane of MCs entrapping the β-carotene. Moreover, symmetrical and asymmetrical stretching vibrations of –C=O at 1746 and 1648 cm −1 confirmed the cross linking caused by genipin in the shell membrane after ionization from –COO− located at 1745 and 1640 cm −1 .
In Vitro Release Kinetics
Release of β-carotene from MCs was studied in 0.1 N HCl at pH 1.2 for 8 h. It was found that the release of β-carotene was slow, steady, and spread over extended period. The slower and sustained release, however, ascribed to the mixed mechanism viz. penetration, solubilization, and diffusion of β-carotene oil through polymeric (CAS-GG complex) matrix of MCs. The release profile was highly dependent upon the composition of shell membrane and type of vehicle used to deliver the bioactive (Fig. 4 ) as stated before by Arifin and co-workers ( ). Release of core material from micro-shell happened through wall of the particles in a sequential manner viz. penetration of solvent followed by gelation of polymer, solubilization of core material into solvent, and subsequent diffusion through the polymeric matrix of the micro-balloons ( ). The best-fit model for release data was evaluated from correlation regression values ( R 2 ). The R 2 values obtained on application of various models on release data is reported in Table II . In most of the formulations, the higher R 2 value was found in the Korseymer-Peppas model than in others, which further indicated that β-carotene has followed the zero-order kinetics ( ). Moreover, to understand the mechanism of release followed by β-carotene Eq. ( 7 ). Fig. 4 In vitro release study of MCs dispersed in 5 ml of 0.1 N HCl (pH 1.2). Experiment was done in triplicate. All were the mean difference and significant at p ≤ 0.05 level Table II In Vitro Release Kinetic Studies of MCs Formulation Zero-order First-order Higuchi Korseymer-Peppas K R 2 K R 2 K R 2 n R 2 G-1 6.31 a ± 3.46 0.715 0.09 b ± 3.32 0.747 16.46 c ± 4.27 0.939 0.61 d ± 3.21 0.961 G-2 5.91 a ± 5.03 0.748 0.12 b ± 4.76 0.663 17.38 c ± 4.03 0.904 0.92 d ± 4.23 0.917 G-3 6.78 a ± 3.86 0.844 0.16 b ± 3.65 0.755 19.63 c ± 4.39 0.954 1.29 d ± 3.82 0.972 G-4 9.88 a ± 4.73 0.679 1.39 b ± 5.09 0.606 27.94 c ± 4.38 0.839 0.89 d ± 3.20 0.889 Values are mean ± SD of samples analyzed individually in triplicate. Different letters show significant differences among different combinations of formulation at p ≤ 0.05 levels n release exponent of the system in Korseymer-Peppas model
where a is a constant-incorporating structural and geometrical characteristic of the formulation, n is the release exponent, indicative of the bioactive release mechanism and function of t .
In this study, the release mechanism of β-carotene was non-Fickian as n was found in between 0.611 and 0.92 (Fickian diffusion n = 0.5, non-Fickian diffusion 0.5 < n < 1 and super case-II transport mechanism n > 1). Whereas all formulations except one has shown super case-II mechanism of release ( ). Also, the release constant of the G-4 MCs was significantly ( p ≤ 0.05) higher than G-1, G-2, and G-3 (Table II ). Therefore, G-4 MCs were considered stable coacervates prepared from optimized concentration of CA-GG (1 and 0.5% ( w / v )) blend with sustained release of β-carotene.
Stability in Simulated GI Fluids
A significant ( p ≤ 0.05) change in the particle size from 178.36 ± 1.72 to 214.38 ± 2.62 μm (within 2 h in SGF pH 1.2) and from 177.21 ± 1.97 to 230.20 ± 3.76 μm (within 6 h in SIF pH 6.8) was observed. The percent entrapment efficiency of β-carotene was observed on simulation with gut fluid incubated with SGF from 65.95 ± 5.33 to 62.86 ± 4.82%, and in SIF, it was changed from 65.86 ± 4.87 to 60.56 ± 5.43% among the replicates of formulation. Thus, it was concluded that freeze-dried MCs were able to retain encapsulated β-carotene in GI fluids (SGF and SIF), indicating their suitability for oral administration ( ).
Antioxidant Activity Determinations
The antioxidant activity of β-carotene encapsulated MCs was examined through DPPH and ABTS method. The increasing order of antioxidant compounds depicted from Fig. 5a , b is as follows G-4 MCs > free β-carotene > ascorbic acid/trolox. The mean IC 50 value of optimized G-4 MCs and free β-carotene in comparison with ascorbic acid and trolox were determined from this experiment. The mean IC 50 value found in DPPH and ABTS methods (Table III ) is representing that the functionality of β-carotene was unaffected following the encapsulation into MCs. It was stated by former authors that lowering the IC 50 value of the higher compound is the antioxidant activity of that compound ( ). The antioxidant activity was performed in duplicate, and significant difference ( p ≤ 0.05) was observed in our investigations. The mechanism of antioxidant activity held by ascorbic acid and phenolic antioxidants such as flavonoids, phenolic acids (hydroxylated benzoic acids and cinnamic acids), and tocopherols, reacts through the excitation of their hydroxyl groups at the outer part of the molecule ( , ). This excited hydroxyl group react with radicals through a conjugated double bond system in vicinity to form a resonance-stabilized structure ( ). The advanced hindrances between the steric demanding bicyclic carotenoid molecules with a centered cis double bond are responsible for scavenging of free radicals and also more susceptible to deterioration by light. However, the reactive part of β-carotene was the conjugated polyene chain in the center of the molecule ( ) which was encapsulated by the shell membrane. This fact made it difficult for steric-demanding oxidants to interact with the carotenoid, especially with the bicyclical structures of β-carotene when encapsulated and might have resulted in lower scavenging activity. However, the control release of β-carotene from the matrix of MCs has retained the ability to terminate the oxidation process by either donating the hydrogen atom to the free radical DPPH or ABTS compound, thus converting them into a more stable product ( ) making it suitable as a dietary supplement in chronic diseases. Fig. 5 Free radical scavenging activity: a DPPH assay where y 1 corresponds to ascorbic acid; y 2 corresponds to free β-carotene and; y 3 and corresponds to G-4 MCs. Experiment was done in triplicate and represented as mean ± standard deviation. All were the mean difference and significant at p ≤ 0.05 level. b ABTS method where y 1 corresponds to trolox; y 2 corresponds to free β-carotene and y 3 corresponds to G-4 MCs. Experiment was done in triplicate and represented as mean ± standard deviation. All were the mean difference and significant at p ≤ 0.05 level Table III IC 50 Values Obtained in DPPH and ABTS Study of Antioxidant Activity Sample name IC 50 (μg/ml) DPPH ABTS Ascorbic acid/trolox 28.06 a ± 2.17 15.54 b ± 1.10 Free β-carotene 92.90 a ± 0.49 21.59 b ± 1.55 G-4 MCs 162.29 a ± 5.09 30.49 b ± 1.87 Values are mean ± SD of samples analyzed individually in duplicate. Different letters show significant differences among samples at p ≤ 0.05 levels IC 50 inhibitory concentration, DPPH 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl, ABTS 2,2′-azino-bis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid)
Photolytic Degradation of β-Carotene-Loaded MCs
Figure 6 (1–6) illustrated the possible structures of degraded compounds formed in free β-carotene when exposed to UV light for 5 days. But it was observed that these compounds were absent in MCs over time. The structure elucidation of these compounds was analyzed by MS spectroscopy on the first and fifth days as shown in SI Fig. 1 . It was also remarked that the rate of degradation of free β-carotene was higher up to 3 days as compared with MCs, and after that, only negligible amounts of the carotene remained in free β-carotene with similar structures as observed on the third day. The results of degradation kinetics (Fig. 7 ) indicate that the oxidative degradation reaction of the carotenoid has followed the first-order kinetics in accordance of Eq. ( 5 ). Fig. 6 1 , Dihydroctinidiolide at m / z = 179; 2 , β-ionone at m / z = 193; 3 , β-apo-14′-carotenal at m / z = 305; 4 , β-apo-10′-carotenal at m / z = 379; 5 , β-apo-8′-carotenal at m / z = 421; 6 , β-apo-13-carotene-diol at m / z = 265 Fig. 7 Degradation kinetics of G-4 MCs ( y 1 ) and free β-carotene ( y 2 ) when exposed under intense UV light for 5 days. Whole analysis were the mean ( n = 3) difference and significant at p ≤ 0.05 level where C is the β-carotene concentration obtained after time t , C 0 is an initial concentration of β-carotene, and k is the first-order rate constant.
The overall photolytic degradation rate ( k ) revealed that the rate constant of free β-carotene is double of MCs, thus confirming the ultimate protection of core β-carotene towards light sensitivity in encapsulated form.
CONCLUSION
An optimized β-carotene-loaded MCs were formulated from CA and GG with an optimized ratio of 1:0.5 coded as G-4 and assessed as stable coacervate with respect of the zeta potential-yield stress phenomenon, percentage yield, encapsulation efficiency, shape and surface morphology, and release behavior. This ratio of biopolymers as wall material has provided the sufficient mechanical strength to core material, selective stability in different GI fluids, and sustained release of β-carotene through the matrix for a prolonged time. The release profile was controlled by the diffusion phenomenon followed by the non-Fickian diffusion as mentioned in the “ RESULTS AND DISCUSSION .” The result of %yield (71 ± 0.55%) and encapsulation efficiency (65.95 ± 5.33%) also supported G-4 as compared with others. Higher yield stress has strongly assured the stability of G-4 MCs in solid form for a long period and hence recommends the application of this method to prevent the oxidation and deterioration of the β-carotene. Antioxidant and photolytic degradation study revealed the retention of antioxidant activity and ultimately with enhanced photostability of encapsulated β-carotene.