Introduction
Nitric oxide (NO) can be generated by different synthase isoforms from substrates such as l -arginine. Its expression in different locations and its effects upon the signaling pathways modulate myocyte function [ , , , ]. The actions of NO, produced locally or supplied by carrier substances, take place through the activation of guanylate cyclase and also through reversible binding to specific proteins, forming compounds such as the S-nitrosothiols. In this regard, S -nitrosoglutathione is an endogenous S-nitrosothiol that intervenes in NO-mediated signaling as a carrier and donor of the latter molecule [ , ]. The many processes regulated by the binding of NO to the cysteine terminal of protein thiol groups include myocardial ion channel function, the generation of action potentials, and the release and reuptake of Ca 2+ during the excitation–contraction process [ , ].
Myocardial stretch is responsible for electrophysiological modifications (mechanoelectric feedback or mechanoelectric coupling) that favor the induction of arrhythmias in contexts such as contraction desynchronization, ischemic heart disease, and atrial or ventricular overload [ , ]. The information available on the factors intervening in the mechanisms and signaling pathways is limited, though NO is known to be implicated. Electromechanical coupling studies have described the intervention of NO and of S-nitrosylation processes in Ca 2+ release induced by stretch [ , ]—though with heterogeneous results. On the other hand, it has been demonstrated that ion channel function activated by stretch [ ] is influenced by NO [ , , ].
One of the methods used to assess the electrophysiological effects produced in response to acute myocardial stretch is the analysis of the time course of the activation patterns during ventricular fibrillation (VF) secondary to stretch [ ]. The study of the variations in VF induced by mechanical stimulation and its modification using drug substances affords useful information on the mechanisms involved in these processes and their control [ , , , ]. The present study uses an experimental preparation involving isolated and perfused rabbit hearts to investigate the effects of S -nitrosoglutathione upon the manifestations of mechanoelectric coupling. Given the influence of NO and S-nitrosylation upon ion channel function activated by stretch [ , , , ] and the heterogeneous and concentration-dependent biphasic effects of NO on intracellular Ca 2+ homeostasis, myocardial contractility, and ion channel function [ , , , , , , , ], we studied the effects of two different concentrations of S -nitrosoglutathione upon electrophysiological manifestations of mechanoelectric feedback. We observed attenuation of the proarrhythmogenic electrophysiological effects induced by stretch and also a loss of this effect and alteration of the baseline VF activation patterns on administering high S -nitrosoglutathione concentrations.
Materials and Methods
Experimental Preparation
The experiments were carried out in abidance with EU Directive 2010/63 and Spanish Royal Decree (RD) 1201/2005 on experiments in animals. The protocol was approved by the Animal Experimentation Ethics Committee of the University of Valencia (Valencia, Spain) (Permit Number: A1367496790352). New Zealand rabbits weighing 3–3.8 kg were used. Following heparinization and euthanasia with pentobarbital (100 mg/kg/i.v.), the hearts were removed and perfused with Tyrode solution according to the Langendorff technique. An epicardial multielectrode (121 unipolar electrodes) was used to obtain recordings from the left ventricular free wall, while an epicardial bipolar electrode was used for stimulation purposes. A customized L-shaped device inserted through the left atrium was used to stretch the left ventricular free wall. The methodology used has been described in detail elsewhere [ , , , ].
Experimental Series
Following a 30-min stabilization period, VF was induced by pacing at increasing frequencies, maintaining perfusion during the arrhythmia. The myocardial stretch protocol was applied in three series of experiments: (a) control ( n = 10); (b) under S -nitrosoglutathione perfusion at a concentration of 10 µM ( n = 11); and (c) under S -nitrosoglutathione perfusion at a concentration of 50 µM ( n = 11). The VF recordings were obtained before, during and after stretch. The effective S -nitrosoglutathione doses may vary between species. On studying the relaxation of human bronchial rings, the reported IC50 was 12 ± 6.1 µM [ ]. In experimental studies in Wistar rats analyzing platelet aggregation, a 0.03–3 µM/kg/min continuous i.v. infusion proved effective [ ], and an IC50 ranging from 6 nM to 20 µM was described in reference to antiaggregation potency. A concentration of 10 µM has been used in several airway cellular studies [ , , ]. In clinical studies analyzing antiplatelet action efficacy in reducing embolization after carotid endarterectomy angioplasty, an infusion of 4.4 nM/kg/min i.v. was used [ , ], while in pre-eclampsia studies the infusion rates were 30 and 100 µg/min [ , ]. In the present study, the 10 µM concentration was regarded as physiological and the 50 µM concentration as supra-physiological [ ].
Study Variables
The VF recordings were subjected to signal spectral analysis [ ] to determine the dominant frequency (DFr), i.e., the frequency at which the maximum spectral density is observed, and the spectral concentration (SpC) or percentage of the total energy comprised within the interval DFr ± 0.5 Hz.
Before stretch (baseline), during the moment of maximum effect of stretch (identified from the spectral analysis) and after stretch suppression, the local activation times were determined by identifying the maximum negative slope of the electrograms, followed by calculation of the fifth percentile (P5) of the intervals between successive activations [ , , ].
Epicardial activation maps of VF during 2-s time windows before, during, and after stretch were constructed, classifying each map according to its complexity: low complexity or type I maps, characterized by a simple wavefront without block lines or slow conduction zones; intermediate complexity of type II maps, with two wavefronts and block lines or slow conduction zones; and high complexity or type III maps, with three or more wavefronts and block lines or slow conduction zones [ , ]. These maps in turn were used to calculate the complexity index (CI) of VF [ ] (Fig. 1 ).
Fig. 1 Activation maps obtained during the stretch phase in an experiment of the control series. Determination of the complexity index of VF (CI) from the activation maps. *Position of the electrode
Statistical Analysis
The general linear model was used to establish differences between quantitative variables: intra-subject differences, repeated measures (baseline, stretch, post-stretch), and inter-subject differences (between series). Statistical significance was considered for p < 0.05. Stepwise multiple logistic regression was used for the multivariate analysis. The IBM SPSS® version 22 statistical package was used throughout.
Results
Dominant Frequency
In the control series, DFr increased during stretch versus the baseline situation (14.8 ± 2.1 at baseline vs. 21.3 ± 3.8 Hz during stretch; p < 0.005), and returned to baseline values after stretch suppression (15.0 ± 1.4 Hz; p = ns). In this series, DFr was seen to increase 45.1% during stretch (Figs. 2 , 3 ).
Fig. 2 Dominant frequency of VF (DFr, in Hz) recorded in the three series at baseline, during stretch and after stretch suppression (POST). * p < 0.05 versus baseline; ¥ p < 0.05 versus control; # p < 0.05 versus 10 µM
Fig. 3 Spectral analysis of the VF recordings obtained in an experiment of each of the series at baseline (BSL), during stretch (STR), and after stretch suppression (POST). DFR dominant frequency, N. amplitude normalized amplitude, PSD power spectral density, SpC spectral concentration
This behavior was seen to repeat in the series exposed to S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM (12.8 ± 1.7 vs. 15.6 ± 1.7 Hz; p < 0.05), with a return to baseline values after stretch suppression (12.5 ± 1.8 Hz; p = ns). In this case, the increase in DFr produced by stretch was smaller than in the control series (22.7%).
In the series exposed to S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM, since the baseline values were higher, the differences versus the baseline situation did not reach statistical significance during stretch (16.0 ± 3.9 vs. 19.4 ± 3.6 Hz; p = ns). After stretch suppression, the differences versus baseline were not significant (13.6 ± 1.3; p = ns). In this series, the increase in DFr during stretch was 24.4%.
On comparing the series, differences were observed at baseline between S -nitrosoglutathione 10 and 50 µM ( p < 0.05). During stretch, there were differences between the control series and nitrosoglutathione 10 µM ( p < 0.05), and between the nitrosoglutathione 10 and 50 µM series ( p < 0.05), but not between the controls and S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM. After stretch, differences were only observed between the controls and S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM ( p < 0.05).
Accordingly, at baseline, DFr was lower in the S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM series than in the 50 µM series, and during stretch DFr in the 10 µM series was lower than in the other two experimental series, where the values were found to be similar.
Spectral Concentration
In the control series, SpC decreased during stretch (26.9 ± 4.5 at baseline versus 17.4 ± 1.7 during stretch; p < 0.05) and returned to baseline values after stretch suppression (27.8 ± 3.9; p = ns) (Fig. 4 ).
Fig. 4 Spectral concentration (SpC in %) obtained in the three series. * p < 0.05 versus baseline
In the series exposed to S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM, SpC likewise decreased with stretch (25.0 ± 6.7 vs. 19.3 ± 2.8; p < 0.05) and returned to baseline values after stretch suppression (28.0 ± 5.5; p = ns).
In the series exposed to S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM, SpC decreased during stretch (24.0 ± 4.1 vs. 17.6 ± 2.3; p < 0.05), and the values following stretch suppression were not significantly different from those recorded at baseline (28.0 ± 7.1; p = ns).
The differences between series were not statistically significant at baseline, during stretch or after stretch suppression.
Thus, all three series showed a decrease in SpC during stretch, with no differences being recorded between series in any of the three phases of the experimental protocol.
Fifth Percentile
In the control series, P5 decreased during stretch (52 ± 10 at baseline vs. 38 ± 4 ms during stretch; p < 0.0001), and returned to values similar to those recorded at baseline after stretch suppression (54 ± 8 ms; p = ns) (Fig. 5 ).
Fig. 5 Fifth percentile of the intervals between successive activations (P5, in ms) obtained in the three series. * p < 0.05 versus baseline; ¥ p < 0.05 versus control; # p < 0.05 versus 10 µM
In the series exposed to S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM, P5 likewise decreased during stretch (51 ± 6 vs. 42 ± 3 ms; p < 0.005), and the values following stretch suppression were not significantly different from those recorded at baseline (54 ± 6 ms; p = ns).
In the series exposed to S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM, the differences only reached statistical significance on comparing the values during stretch versus those after stretch (34 ± 3 vs. 41 ± 4 ms; p < 0.005). During stretch, since the baseline values were shorter, the differences versus baseline failed to reach statistical significance (38 ± 6 ms; p = ns).
On comparing the series, the baseline values in the S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM series were significantly lower than in the control series ( p < 0.005) and in the S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM series ( p < 0.01). During stretch, no significant differences were observed between the control series and the S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM series, while the S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM series showed values significantly greater than those found in the control series ( p < 0.05) and in the S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM series ( p < 0.0001). Following stretch suppression, significant differences were recorded between the control series and the S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM series ( p < 0.0001) and between the latter and the 10 µM series ( p < 0.0001). There were no differences between the controls and the S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM series.
Accordingly, at baseline, P5 was lower in the S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM series than in the other two experimental series. During stretch, this parameter decreased less in the S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM series, and after stretch suppression P5 in the S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM series was found to be lower than in the other two series, in the same way as at baseline.
Complexity Index of VF
During stretch, the control series showed an increase in CI versus the baseline situation (1.27 ± 0.13 at baseline vs. 1.60 ± 0.15 during stretch; p < 0.01). No differences were observed on comparing the baseline situation versus after stretch (1.20 ± 0.27; p = ns) (Fig. 6 ).
Fig. 6 Ventricular fibrillation complexity index (CI) obtained in the three series. * p < 0.05 versus baseline; ¥ p < 0.05 versus control; # p < 0.05 versus 10 µM
In the series exposed to S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM, CI likewise increased during stretch (1.32 ± 0.15 vs. 1.61 ± 0.15; p < 0.001) and returned to baseline values after stretch suppression (1.29 ± 0.14; p = ns).
In the series exposed to S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM, the CI values recorded at baseline, during stretch, and after stretch suppression were increased, with no significant differences among the three phases of the experimental protocol (1.77 ± 0.18; 1.84 ± 0.17; 1.80 ± 0.18; p = ns).
On comparing the series, the baseline values corresponding to S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM were greater ( p < 0.0001) than those of the other two series. There were no differences between the controls and the nitrosoglutathione 10 µM series. Likewise, during stretch the highest values were recorded in the nitrosoglutathione 50 µM series, with significant differences versus both the controls ( p < 0.05) and S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM ( p < 0.05). There were no differences on comparing the controls versus the nitrosoglutathione 10 µM series. Similar results were obtained on contrasting the values obtained after stretch suppression.
Accordingly, at baseline, during stretch, and after stretch suppression, CI was greater in the series exposed to S -nitrosoglutathione 50 M than in the other series. Both the controls and the S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM series reached similar values during stretch.
The univariate analysis of CI versus the rest of the analyzed variables revealed significant correlations between this parameter and P5 ( R = 0.6; p < 0.0001), DFr ( R = 0.4; p < 0.0001), and SpC ( R = 0.3; p < 0.0001). In turn, in the multivariate analysis taking CI as independent variable and P5, DFr, and SpC as dependent variables, only P5 was found to enter the stepwise regression model (constant = 2.4; slope = − 0.02; R = 0.6; p < 0.0001; standard error of the estimate = 0.23).
Discussion
The main findings of this study were as follows: (a) at baseline (i.e., before myocardial stretch), S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM did not significantly modify ventricular activation during VF, while the 50 µM drug concentration lowered P5 and increased CI; (b) S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM attenuated VF acceleration and reduction of P5 induced by stretch; and (c) during stretch, the S -nitrosoglutathione 50 µM series reached CI values greater than those recorded in the other two series.
Effects of S-Nitrosoglutathione Upon Myocardial Electrophysiological Properties and Activation Patterns During VF
The reported effects of NO and S-nitrosylation upon myocardial ion channel function are heterogeneous and sometimes conflicting [ , , , , , ]. In the case of the Nav1.5 sodium channels, the probability of channel opening is reduced, though increased persistence of the late Na + current has also been described. In relation to the potassium channels, inhibition of the transient outward current (Ito) has been reported as a result of the action of NO and NO carriers, as well as inhibition of the rapid component of the delayed rectifier current (IKr) and increments in the slow component (IKs) and inward rectifier current (IK1) [ , , ]. Regarding the L-type Ca 2+ current (ICa), different effects have been observed, ranging from increments to decrements or concentration-dependent biphasic effects [ , ].
The nitrosylation and denitrosylation cycles determine the function of the RyR2 ryanodine receptor [ ]. There have been reports of an increased probability of opening mediated by NO carriers and S-nitrosothiols [ , , , ], though reductions in activity and inhibition of Ca 2+ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum mediated by NO have also been reported [ ], as well as an increase in spontaneous Ca 2+ release independently of cyclic GMP [ ]. Such a disparity of effects has been related to the site of origin of NO, its concentration, the redox status of the channel, or the beta-adrenergic stimulation levels. Furthermore, it has been postulated that in the presence of high NO and superoxide concentrations, peroxynitrite-mediated oxidation may dominate signaling [ , , , , , ]. High NO concentrations have been associated to inhibitory effects upon mitochondrial respiration [ ].
In the present study, S -nitrosoglutathione at the 10 µM concentration induced no significant changes in either P5 or CI at baseline, but the 50 µM concentration was seen to shorten P5 and induce a notorious increase in the complexity of the arrhythmia at baseline. The multivariate analysis taking CI as independent variable found P5—an indicator of myocardial refractoriness [ , , ]—to be the variable accepted by the model. Of the different actions of NO and NO carriers upon the ion currents, the increase in IKs current determining a shortening of the action potential and the increase in rectifier current IK1 that facilitates hyperpolarization of the resting potential and shortening of the final phase of the action potential [ , ] may have contributed to the shortening of P5 and the consequent increase in the complexity of activation during VF.
Modification of the Effects of Myocardial Stretch by S-Nitrosoglutathione
A number of mechanisms have been described in relation to the inotropic responses to myocardial stretch [ , , , , ]. These responses are characterized by an increase in amplitude of the transient Ca 2+ currents, which among other mechanisms has been associated to a rise in NO production [ ]. Such phenomena would involve activation of the L-type calcium channels, the modification of RyR2, and an increase in Ca 2+ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum [ ]—though prolonged RyR2 activation could give rise to sarcoplasmic reticulum depletion and a negative inotropic effect. Likewise, the L-type calcium channels, RyR2, and the Na + /Ca 2+ exchanger are sensitive to reactive oxygen species and oxidative balance [ ], which are also modified by myocardial stretch.
In relation to mechanoelectric coupling, the information available on the participation and effects of NO is more limited. In myocardial cells subjected to stretch, NO carrier-mediated inhibition of the mechanosensitive channels has been described, while activation has been reported in cells not subjected to stretch [ ]. The inhibitory effect could have contributed to the attenuation of the effects of stretch observed in the S -nitrosoglutathione 10 µM experimental series.
On the other hand, in relation to the mechanical effects of stretch, a number of studies have described the participation of autocrine/paracrine pathways and an increased production of reactive oxygen species [ , ], with changes in the Na + /H + exchanger, increased Na + inflow to the myocytes, and activation of the reverse mode of the Na + /Ca 2+ exchanger, resulting in augmented Ca 2+ inflow. The increase in calcium in turn modifies the cell electrophysiological properties [ , ] and modulates the slope of the action potential duration restitution curve [ ]—this in turn determining wavefront disruption and the complexity of VF.
Previous studies have shown the changes in VF activation patterns induced by acute stretch to be attenuated by blocking of the Na + /Ca 2+ exchanger and beta-receptors [ ], inhibition of the Na + /H + exchanger [ ], and inhibition of the delayed Na + current [ ], while inhibition of the angiotensin II receptor, endothelin receptor A, and adenosine receptor A 2 has not been found to modify these effects [ ]. The results of the present study illustrate the attenuating effect of S -nitrosoglutathione when administered at a concentration of 10 µM. In contrast, at a concentration of 50 µM, the drug not only increases VF basal frequency and complexity but also contributes to higher CI values during stretch. The greater concentration of S -nitrosoglutathione could have favored oxidative imbalance, with an increased accumulation of Na + and its exchange for Ca 2+ , as well as augmented diastolic Ca 2+ loss from the sarcoplasmic reticulum through the RyR2 receptor—contributing to the increase in intracellular Ca 2+ and its electrophysiological consequences (Fig. 7 ).
Fig. 7 Diagram of the hypothesized molecular mechanisms implicated in the S -nitrosoglutathione dose-dependent modulation of the stretch-induced proarrhythmogenic effects. GSNO S -nitrosoglutathione, INaL late sodium current; Nav1.5 voltage-gated sodium channel, NO nitric oxide; ROS reactive oxygen species, RyR2 ryanodine receptor, SR sarcoplasmic reticulum
Clinical Implications
Nitric oxide carriers are used in clinical practice for different purposes, including vasodilatation, antiplatelet action, increased coronary artery flow, protection against ischemic damage, and control of arterial hypertension or bronchoconstriction [ , ]. The effects upon myocardial contractility may exhibit biphasic behavior depending on the concentration, with positive inotropic effects at low concentration and negative inotropic effects at high concentration—which may prove harmful in contexts such as shock or cardiopulmonary resuscitation. The results of the present study contribute information on the attenuation of the proarrhythmogenic electrophysiological effects induced by stretch, and therefore on the possible protective effect against arrhythmias favored by overload. On the other hand, the study also offers information on the loss of this effect when administering high S -nitrosoglutathione concentrations—a fact that underscores the need to consider the biphasic effects of substances of this kind when contemplating their clinical use.
Limitations
The use of an experimental model based on the isolated and perfused rabbit heart avoids the influence of uncontrolled variables upon the studied electrophysiological parameters, including neurohumoral and hemodynamic factors, while allowing analysis of the effects of concrete variables and of their drug-induced modifications. The conclusions of the study must be interpreted in the context of the animal species used, and in this regard studies are needed in order to allow extrapolation of the results to other species.
Conclusions
S -nitrosoglutathione attenuates the effects of mechanoelectric feedback when perfused at a concentration of 10 µM, while exposure to a concentration of 50 µM alters the basal activation pattern during VF and accentuates the increase in complexity of the arrhythmia produced by myocardial stretch.