Introduction
Anthracyclines (ANT), e.g., doxorubicin (DOX) or daunorubicin (DNR) are anticancer antibiotics commonly used to treat different types of cancer [ ]. However, clinical usefulness of ANT is associated with a cumulative cardiotoxicity leading to irreversible cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure [ ]. Although the exact mechanisms regulating the cardiotoxic effect of ANT are still ambiguous, numerous studies demonstrated that inhibition of topoisomerase II, oxidative stress, alteration of myocardial energy metabolism, mitochondrial damage and apoptosis could play a role in ANT-induced cardiotoxicity [ , , ].
Increasing evidence has revealed the contribution of arachidonic acid (AA) metabolites in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease (CVD) [ ]. AA is known to be metabolized by cyclooxygenases (COXs), lipoxygenases (LOXs) and cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes to form biologically active eicosanoids [ ]. CYP, cysteinato-heme mixed function mono-oxygenases enzymes, oxidizes AA into epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) and hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs) which are known to play an important role in the maintenance of cardiovascular health [ , , , , ]. CYP1 family mainly CYP1B1 metabolizes AA by its bis-allylic oxidation reaction (LOX-like reaction) to generate a cardiotoxic mid-chain HETEs metabolite whereas, CYP ω-hydroxylases, namely the CYP4 family, metabolize AA into its cardiotoxic form, 20-HETE [ , , ]. On the other hand, CYP epoxygenases such as CYP2B and CYP2C metabolize AA into four regioisomers of cardioprotective EETs, 14,15-EET, 11,12-EET, 8,9-EET and 5,6-EET metabolites [ , ].
EETs, an endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factors (EDHF), are potent vasodilators, have potent antiplatelet and antiapoptotic effects and reduce vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation [ ]. However, the catabolism of EETs by soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) into their corresponding degradation products dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids (DHETs) diminishes their cardioprotective effect [ ]. Importantly, sEH inhibitors have been reported to increase EETs availability thereby exerting an antihypertensive effect, improving endothelial function and reducing angiotensin II (Ang-II)- and isoproterenol (ISO)-induced cardiac hypertrophy [ , ]. Clinically, AR9281, a selective sEH inhibitor, has been evaluated in phase II clinical trial for the treatment of hypertension in patient with type II diabetes mellitus [ ].
An increasing number of studies from our laboratory have shown an important role of AA metabolites in DOX-induced cardiotoxicity. For example, we have demonstrated recently the DOX-induced cardiac dysfunction through the induction of CYP1B1 and its associated cardiotoxic mid-chain HETEs metabolite [ ]. Furthermore, both the sEH inhibitor, trans -4-[4-(3-adamantan-1-yl-ureido)-cyclohexyloxy]-benzoic acid (tAUCB), and the ω-hydroxylase inhibitor, N -hydroxy- N ′-(4-butyl-2-methylphenyl)-formamidine (HET0016), were shown to attenuate the DOX-mediated toxicity in cardiac cells, which further confirms the role of CYP and its AA metabolites in DOX-induced cardiotoxicity [ , ].
Currently, we aimed to investigate the role of CYP and its associated AA metabolites in the development of cardiotoxicity induced by DNR. For this purpose, the current study was designed to: (1) examine the capacity of DNR to increase cardiotoxic HETEs and inhibit cardioprotective EETs metabolite in vitro in the human ventricular cardiomyocyte cell line RL-14 and in vivo in rats, and (2) explore whether modulating the formation of AA metabolites would confer cardioprotection against DNR-induced cardiotoxicity. Our study provides the first evidence that DNR induces cardiotoxicity in RL-14 cells and in vivo in rats through a sEH-mediated EETs degradation-dependent mechanism.
Materials and Methods
Materials
DNR and tAUCB as well as the deuterated metabolites (internal standards) were purchased from Cayman Chemical (Ann Arbor, MI, USA). Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium/F-12 (DMEM/F-12) and goat IgG peroxidase secondary antibody were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). TRIzol reagent was purchased from Invitrogen Co. (Grand Island, NY, USA). High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit and SYBR ® Green PCR Master Mix were purchased from Applied Biosystem (Foster city, CA, USA). Nitrocellulose membrane was purchased from Bio-Rad Laboratories (Hercules, CA, USA). CYP1B1, CYP2B, CYP2C, CYP4A, sEH and β-ACTIN primary antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). NF-κB Family EZ-TFA Transcription Factor Assay Chemiluminescent Kit was purchased from Millipore (Millipore, Schwalbach/Ts., Germany, #70-660). Chemiluminescence Western blot detection kits were obtained from GE Healthcare Life Sciences (Piscataway, NJ, USA). All other chemicals were purchased from Fisher Scientific Co (Toronto, ON, USA).
Animals
The investigation follows the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the US National Institutes of Health (Publication No. 85-23, revised 1996). All experimental animal procedures were approved by the University of Alberta Health Sciences Animal Policy and Welfare Committee. Male Sprague–Dawley rats weighing 200–250 g were obtained from Charles River Canada (St. Constant, QC, Canada). All animals were maintained on a 12-h light/dark cycle with food and water available ad libitum.
Experimental Design and Treatment Protocol
The rats were randomly segregated into two groups. The first group ( n = 6) consisted of control rats that received an intraperitoneal injection (i.p.) injection of saline. The second group ( n = 6) consisted of DNR-treated rats that received i.p. injection of DNR (5 mg kg −1 for 24 h). Thereafter, rats were dissected and hearts were quickly excised, washed with saline, blotted with filter paper and then immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, then stored at − 80 °C until analysis.
The rats were randomly segregated into four groups. The first group ( n = 4) consisted of control rats that received polyethylene glycol (PEG 400) (i.p.). The second group ( n = 4) consisted of DNR-treated rats that received DNR (5 mg kg −1 for 24 h). The third group ( n = 4) consisted of tAUCB-treated rats that received tAUCB (1 mg kg −1 for 24 h). The fourth group ( n = 4) consisted of rats that were treated with both DNR and tAUCB as described in the aforementioned groups. Thereafter, rats were dissected and hearts were quickly excised, washed with saline, blotted with filter paper and then immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, then stored at − 80 °C until analysis.
RNA Extraction and cDNA Synthesis
RNA was isolated using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen ® ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and quantified by measuring the absorbance at 260 nm. RNA purity was determined by measuring the 260/280 ratio (> 1.8). Thereafter, first-strand cDNA synthesis was performed using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems), according to the manufacturer’s instructions as described previously [ ]. Briefly, 1.5 µg of total RNA from each sample was added to a mixture of 2.0 µl of 10× reverse transcriptase buffer, 0.8 µl of 25× dNTP mix (100 mM), 2.0 µl of 10× reverse transcriptase random primers, 1.0 µl of MultiScribe reverse transcriptase, and 4.2 µl of nuclease-free water. The final reaction mixture was kept at 25 °C for 10 min, heated to 37 °C for 120 min, heated for 85 °C for 5 min, and finally cooled to 4 °C.
Quantification of mRNA Expression by Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (Real-Time PCR)
Quantitative analysis of specific mRNA expression was performed by real-time PCR by subjecting the resulting cDNA to PCR amplification using 96-well optical reaction plates in the ABI Prism 7500 System (Applied Biosystems) [ ]. The 25-µl reaction mixture contained 0.1 µl of 10 µM forward primer and 0.1 µl of 10 µM reverse primer (40 nM final concentration of each primer), 12.5 µl of SYBR Green Universal Master mix, 11.05 µl of nuclease-free water, and 1.25 µl of cDNA sample. Human and rat primers sequences and probes for tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin 6 (IL-6), COX-2, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), α-myocin heavy chain (α-MHC), β-myocin heavy chain (β-MHC) and β-actin are illustrated in Table 1 . These primers were purchased from Integrated DNA technologies (IDT, Coralville, IA, USA). The fold change in the mRNA expression levels between treated and untreated cells was corrected by the levels of β-actin. The real-time PCR data were analyzed using the relative gene expression (i.e., ΔΔCT) method, as described and explained previously [ ]. Briefly, the fold change in the level of target genes between treated and untreated cells, corrected by the level of β-actin, was determined using the following equation: fold change = 2 −Δ(ΔCt) , where ΔCt = Ct (target) − Ct (β-actin) and Δ(ΔCt) = ΔCt (treated) − ΔCt (untreated) . Table 1 Primers sequences used for RT-PCR reactions Gene Forward primer Reverse primer a - MHC GCCCTTTGACATTCGCACTG GGTTTCAGCAATGACCTTGCC β - MHC TCACCAACAACCCCTACGATT CTCCTCAGCGTCATCAATGGA ANP CAACGCAGACCTGATGGATTT AGCCCCCGCTTCTTCATT Rat a - MHC ACAGAGTGCTTCGTGCCTGAT CGAATTTCGGAGGGTTCTGC Rat β - MHC CGCTCAGTCATGGCGGAT GCCCCAAATGCAGCCAT Rat ANP GGAGCCTGCGAAGGTCAA TATCTTCGGTACCGGAAGCTGT Rat BNP CAGAAGCTGCTGGAGCTGATAAG TGTAGGGCCTTGGTCCTTTG Rat COX - 2 GTGTCCCTTTGCCTCTTCAAT GAGGCACTTGCGTTGATGGT Rat TNF - α ACAAGGCTGCCCCGACTAT CTCCTGGTATGAAGTGGCAAATC Rat IL - 6 GTCAACTCCATCTGCCCTTCA GGCAGTGGCTGTCAACAT β - ACTIN CTGGCACCCAGCACAATG GCCGATCCACACGGAGTACT Rat GAPDH CAAGGTCATCCATGACAACTTTG GGGCCATCCACAGTCTTCTG
Measurement of AA Metabolites in Heart Tissue
Measurement of heart tissue AA metabolites was taken using a previously described method [ ]. Briefly, 250 mg heart tissue was dissected and homogenized on ice with 1 ml of methanol containing the deuterated metabolites (internal standards), acetic acid, butylated hydroxytoluene and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid. Thereafter, the homogenates were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 15 min at 0 °C. AA metabolites were extracted from the resulted supernatant by the solid-phase cartridge (Oasis ® HLB). Conditioning and equilibration of the solid-phase cartridge were performed with 1 ml of each of methanol, ethyl acetate, 0.2% formic acid (v/v) and 10% methanol in 0.2% formic acid (v/v), in sequence. After sample application, cartridges were washed with 1 ml of each of 0.2% formic acid (v/v) and 10% methanol in 0.2% formic acid (v/v), in sequence. Finally, AA metabolites were eluted by 1 ml of each of 1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v) and ethyl acetate, in sequence. Sample eluents were dried using speed vacuum (Savant, Farmingdale, NY, USA), reconstituted in 60 µl of 0.01% formic acid in acetonitrile to be analyzed by mass spectrometry.
Apparatus and Chromatographic Conditions
AA, EETs, DHETs and HETEs were analyzed using liquid chromatography–electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (Waters Micromass ZQ 4000 spectrometer; Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) as previously described [ ]. Briefly, a gradient separation was performed on a reverse-phase C18 column (Alltima HP, 150 × 2.1 mm; GRACE Davison, Lokeren, Belgium) at 35 °C. Mobile phase A consisted of water with 0.01% formic acid and 0.005% triethylamine (v/v), whereas mobile phase B consisted of 8% methanol, 8% isopropanol, and 84% acetonitrile with 0.01% formic acid and 0.005% triethylamine (v/v). Samples were subjected to linear gradient elution at a flow rate of 200 µl/min, as follows: 60–48% in 4 min, held isocratically at 48% for 24 min, 48–35% in 11 min, 35–0% in 11 min, and finally held isocratically at 0% for 7 min of mobile phase A. Injection volume of 40 µl was used, and the mass spectrometer was run under negative ionization mode with single ion monitoring of AA at m / z = 303, HETEs and EETs at m / z = 319, DHETs at m / z = 337 and internal standards at m / z = 311, m / z = 327 and m / z = 360 for AA-d8, 15-HETE-d8 and PGE2-d9, respectively.
Preparation of Microsomal Protein
Preparations of heart microsomal protein were prepared by differential centrifugation of homogenized tissues. Briefly, individual heart tissues were rapidly removed and washed in ice-cold potassium chloride [1.15% (w/v)]. Consequently, they were cut into pieces and homogenized in cold sucrose solution (1 g of tissue in 5 ml of 0.25 M sucrose). The homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 20 min, and the resulting supernatant was centrifuged again at 100,000 g for 60 min to obtain the microsomal pellet. The final pellets were reconstituted in cold sucrose and stored at − 80 °C. Thereafter, microsomal protein concentrations were determined by the Lowry method using bovine serum albumin as a standard.
Western Blot Analysis
Western blot analysis under denaturing and reducing conditions was performed using a previously described method [ , ]. Briefly, proteins from each treated group were diluted with same amount (1:1) of 2X loading buffer (0.1 M tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris)-HCl, pH 6.8, 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 1.5% bromophenol blue, 20% glycerol, 5% β-mercaptoethanol), boiled and loaded onto a 10% SDS–polyacrylamide gel. Samples were electrophoresed at 120 V for 2 h and separated proteins were transferred to Trans-blot nitrocellulose membrane (0.45 μm) in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris–HCl, 192 mM glycine, and 20% (v/v) methanol. Protein blots were blocked overnight at 4 °C in a solution containing 5% skim milk powder, 2% BSA and 0.5% Tween-20 in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) solution (0.15 M NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 25 mM Tris-base). After blocking, the blots were washed six times for 1 h with TBS-Tween-20 before being incubated with a primary polyclonal rabbit of CYP1B1 antibody (0.2 μg/ml) for 2 h at room temperature in TBS solution containing 0.05% (v/v) Tween-20 and 0.02% sodium azide. Incubation with a peroxidase conjugated anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody was carried out in blocking solution for 1 h at room temperature. The bands were visualized using the enhanced chemiluminescence method according to the manufacturer’s instructions (GE Healthcare, Mississauga, ON). The intensity of protein band was semi-quantified relative to the signals obtained for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) protein, using ImageJ ® image processing program (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij ).
Cell Culture and Treatments
Human cardiomyocyte RL-14 cells (American Type Cell Culture, Manassas, VA, USA) were maintained in DMEM/F-12, with phenol red supplemented with 12.5% fetal bovine serum, 20 µM l -glutamine, 100 IU/ml penicillin G and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. Cells were grown in 75 cm 2 tissue culture flasks at 37 °C under a 5% CO 2 humidified environment.
The cells were seeded in 12- and 6-well cell culture plates in F12/DMEM culture media for RNA and protein assays, respectively. In all experiments, the cells were treated for the indicated time intervals in serum-free media with various concentrations of DNR as indicated.
Cytotoxicity of DNR
The effect of DNR on RL-14 cells viability was determined by measuring the level of LDH activity as described previously [ ]
Preparation of Nuclear Extract
Nuclear extracts from RL-14 cells were prepared according to a previously described procedure with minor modifications [ ]. Briefly, RL-14 cells were grown on 100-mm Petri dishes were treated with vehicle or mid-chain HETEs (20 μM) for 2 h. Thereafter, cells were washed twice with cold PBS, pelleted and suspended in cold buffer A [10 mM Hepes–KOH, 1.5 mm MgCl2, 10 mM KC1, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol and 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (PMSF)] pH 7.9, at 4 °C. After 15 min on ice, the cells were centrifuged at 6500 g and the pellets were suspended again in high salt concentration cold buffer C (20 mM Hepes–KOH, pH 7.9, 25% glycerol, 420 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol and 0.5 mM PMSF) to extract nuclear proteins. The cells were then incubated on ice with vigorous agitation for 60 min followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 12,000 g at 4 °C. The nuclear extracts (supernatant) were stored at − 80 °C till further use.
Determination of NF-κB Binding Activity
The NF-κB Family EZ-TFA Transcription Factor Assay Chemiluminescent Kit (Millipore, Schwalbach/Ts., Germany, #70-660) was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol [ ].
Metabolism of AA by RL-14 Cells
To determine whether CYP enzymes in RL-14 cells are metabolically active, cells were plated in 100 mm Petri dishes and treated with 20 µM 5-, 12- and 15-HETE for 24 h and then the cells were incubated with 50 μM AA for 3 h. AA metabolites were extracted from the media by ethyl acetate and dried using speed vacuum (Savant, Farmingdale, NY, USA). Extracted AA and metabolites were analyzed using liquid chromatography–electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (LC–ESI–MS) (Waters Micromass ZQ 4000 spectrometer) method as described previously [ ].
Statistical Analysis
The comparative analysis of the results from various experimental groups with their corresponding controls was performed using SigmaPlot ® for Windows (Systat Software, Inc, CA, USA). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey–Kramer multiple comparison test or student t test were carried out to assess which treatment group(s) showed a significant difference from the control group. The differences were considered significant when p < 0.05.
Results
Effect of DNR Treatment on Heart Weight/Body Weight and Heart Weight/Tibial Length (HW/BW and HW/BW) Ratios
In order to investigate whether DNR treatment causes cardiotoxicity in rat, we measured the effect of DNR on the HW/BW and HW/TL ratios. Administration of DNR (5 mg/kg) for 24 h resulted in significant increases in the HW/BW and HW/TL by approximately 120% in comparison with control (Fig. 1 a). Fig. 1 Effect of DNR treatment on HW/BW or HW/TL ratios and the mRNA expression of hypertrophic and fibrotic genes in rat cardiac tissues. Rats were injected with vehicle or DNR (5 mg/kg i.p.) for 24 h and a then, HW/BW or HW/TL ratios were determined. b Hypertrophic genes, ANP, BNP, and β-MHC/α-MHC in addition to c fibrotic genes, TNF-α, IL6 and COX-2 were quantified by real-time PCR in rat heart. The results are presented as the means of six independent experiment ± SEM. + p < 0.05 compared to control
Effect of DNR Treatment on the mRNA Expression of Hypertrophic and Fibrotic Genes in Rat Cardiac Tissues
To further explore whether the increase in HW/BW or HW/TL is associated with an alteration in the expression of cardiac hypertrophic and fibrotic genes, rats were treated with DNR (5 mg/kg) for 24 h; thereafter, the mRNA expression levels of ANP, BNP, and β-MHC/α-MHC in addition to fibrotic genes, TNF-α, IL6 and COX-2 were quantified by real-time PCR in rat heart.
Figure 1 b shows that DNR treatment significantly increased the mRNA expression of hypertrophic gene markers, ANP, BNP and β-MHC/α-MHC, by approximately 1.5-, 2.5- and 4.5-fold, respectively, in comparison with control. Furthermore, DNR treatment significantly increased the fibrotic genes, TNF-α, IL6 and COX-2 by approximately two-, five-, and threefold, respectively, in comparison with control (Fig. 1 c). Taken together, all results presented in Fig. 1 clearly demonstrated the ability of DNR to induce cardiotoxicity in vivo.
Effect of DNR on the Formation Cardioprotective EETs and Cardiotoxic HETEs Metabolite in Rat Cardiac Tissues
To examine whether the DNR-induced cardiotoxicity is due to the increased formation of cardiotoxic HETEs and/or the decreased formation of cardioprotective EETs, AA metabolites were measured using LC–ESI–MS. Figure 2 a shows that DNR was only able to significantly decrease the formation of 14,15-EET, 11,12-EET, 8,9-EET and 5,6-EET by approximately 60, 61, 55 and 50%, respectively, in comparison with control. On the other hand, DNR significantly increased the formation of 11,12-DHET, 8,9-DHET and 5,6-DHET by 300, 280 and 450%, respectively, in comparison with control (Fig. 2 b). Fig. 2 Effect of DNR on the formation cardioprotective EETs and cardiotoxic HETEs metabolite in rat cardiac tissues. Rats were injected with vehicle or DNR (5 mg/kg i.p.) for 24 h and a then, 14,15-EET, 11,12-EET, 8,9-EET and 5,6-EET in addition to b 14,15-DHET, 11,12-DHET, 8,9-DHET and 5,6-DHET were measured using LC–ESI–MS. The results are presented as the means of six independent experiment ± SEM. + p < 0.05 compared to control
To determine the effect of DNR on cardiotoxic HETEs metabolite, we measured the level of mid-chain HETEs, typified by 5-, 8-, 9-, 11, 12-, and 15-HETE in addition to 20-HETE metabolites. Our results showed that DNR did not significantly change the level of mid-chain HETEs and 20-HETE metabolite in comparison with control (Data not shown).
Effect of DNR on the Expression of CYP-Mediated LOX, Epoxygenase and ω-Hydroxylase Protein and Activity Levels in Rat Cardiac Tissues
To examine the mechanism by which DNR modulates the formation of AA metabolites, the protein expression level for CYP1B1, CYP2B, CYP2C, in addition to CYP4A, was determined using Western blot analysis. Figure 3 a shows that treatment of rats with DNR significantly decreased CYP2B by approximately 40% in comparison with control. On the other hand, DNR significantly increased the expression of CYP2C by about 250% in comparison with control (Fig. 3 a). However, no significant changes were observed in the protein expression of CYP-mediated LOX and ω-hydroxylase action, CYP1B1 and CYP4A, respectively, between the control and the DNR-treated group (Fig. 3 a). Fig. 3 Effect of DNR on the expression of CYP-mediated LOX, epoxygenase and ω-hydroxylase protein and activity levels in rat cardiac tissues. Rats were injected with vehicle or DNR (5 mg/kg i.p.) for 24 h and a thereafter, CYP1B1, CYP2B, CYP2C and CYP4A protein expression levels were determined by Western blot analysis. b ω-Hydroxylase activity was determined from the 20-HETE formation, whereas as LOX activity was determined from the sum of 5-, 8-, 9-, 11-, 12-, and 15-HETE level in cardiac tissues. Epoxygenase activity was determined from the sum of EETs and DHETs level in cardiac tissues. The results are presented as the means of six independent experiment ± SEM. + p < 0.05 compared to control
To further examine whether the effect obtained at protein level in response to DNR treatment is translated into functional catalytic activity, the total LOX, ω-hydroxylase and epoxygenase activities level were determined in control and rats treated with DNR. Figure 3 b shows that the total epoxygenase activity was significantly increased in the cardiac tissue of DNR-treated rats by 160% in comparison with control (Fig. 3 b). On the other hand and in consistent with what was observed at protein level, no significant changes were observed in total activity level of LOX and ω-hydroxylase between the control and the DNR-treated group (Fig. 3 b).
Effect of DNR on the Expression of sEH mRNA, Protein and Activity Levels in Rats
EETs are known to be formed by CYP epoxygenase and degraded by sEH enzyme. Therefore, we investigated whether the decreased formation of EETs by DNR is attributed to the increase in sEH enzyme. For this purpose, total RNA was extracted from the heart of treated rats and the mRNA level of EPHX2 was determined by real-time PCR. Our results showed that treatment of rats with DNR significantly induced the expression of EPHX2 by approximately a threefold induction in comparison with control (Fig. 4 a). Fig. 4 Effect of DNR on the expression sEH mRNA, protein and activity levels in rat cardiac tissues. Rats were injected with vehicle or DNR (5 mg/kg i.p.) for 24 h and a thereafter, EPHX2 was quantified by real-time PCR in rat heart. b sEH protein expression level was determined by Western blot analysis. c sEH activity was calculated as the ratio of total DHETs/total EETs. The results are presented as the means of six independent experiment ± SEM. + p < 0.05 compared to control
To further examine whether the induction of EPHX2 mRNA in cardiac tissue in response to DNR treatment is translated into functional protein and catalytic activity, sEH protein expression and activity level were determined by Western blot analysis and LC–ESI–MS, respectively. Figure 4 b shows that, in a pattern similar to what was observed with the mRNA, treatment of rats with DNR significantly induced the protein expression and the activity of sEH enzyme by approximately 250 and 400%, respectively, in comparison with control, confirming the role of sEH in the degradation of EETs and cardiotoxicity-mediated by DNR.
The role of sEH enzyme in the DNR-mediated cardiotoxicity was further examined by several approaches using the sEH inhibitor, tAUCB, and the human ventricular cardiomyocyte cell line RL-14. Therefore, a series of independent experiments were conducted.
Effect of DNR and tAUCB on RL-14 Cells Viability
To determine the concentration of DNR to be utilized in the current study, RL-14, human ventricular cardiomyocytes, cells were exposed for 3 h to wide range of DNR concentrations (0, 0025, 0.05, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2.5, 5 and 10 μM). After 24 h, the cell viability was determined using LDH assay. Our results showed that DNR concentrations ranging from 0.25 to 10 μM significantly decreased the cell viability (Fig. 5 a). Furthermore, tAUCB 1 µM alone or in combination with DNR 0.1 µM did not significantly affect the cell viability (Fig. 5 b). Based on these findings, DNR concentration of 0.1 µM and tAUCB 1 µM w selected to be utilized in all subsequent in vitro experiments in RL-14 cells (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 5 Effect of DNR and tAUCB on RL-14 cells viability. a RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with various concentrations of DNR (0, 0.1, 0.25, 1, 2.5, 5 and 10 μM). After 24 h, RL-14 cell viability was determined using LDH assay. b RL-14 cells were exposed for 3 h to 0.1 μM DNR in the presence and absence of 1 μM tAUCB. After 24 h, RL-14 cell viability was determined using LDH assay. The results are presented as the means of six independent experiment ± SEM. + p < 0.05 compared to control. * p < 0.05 compared to DNR
Effect of tAUCB on DNR-Mediated Cellular Hypertrophy
To examine whether the cellular hypertrophy in RL-14 cells induced by DNR is a sEH-dependent mechanism, we used a selective sEH inhibitor, tAUCB. For this purpose, RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with 0.1 µM DNR in the presence and absence of 1 μM tAUCB. After 24 h, the mRNA levels of β-MHC/α-MHC and ANP were determined by real-time PCR. Figure 6 shows that DNR alone caused a significant induction of β-MHC/α-MHC expression by approximately 2.5-fold of induction in comparison with control. On the other hand, DNR significantly inhibited the expression of ANP by about 50% in comparison with control (Fig. 6 b). Importantly, treatment with tAUCB significantly prevented the DNR-mediated effect on β-MHC/α-MHC and ANP (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Effect of tAUCB on DNR-mediated cellular hypertrophy. RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with 0.1 µM DNR in the presence and absence of 1 μM tAUCB. a After 24 h, the mRNA levels of β-MHC/α-MHC and b ANP were determined by real-time PCR. The results are presented as the means of six independent experiment ± SEM. + p < 0.05 compared to control. * p < 0.05 compared to DNR
Effect of tAUCB on DNR-Mediated Effect on sEH Enzyme Activity
Initially, we have investigated the effect of DNR alone on sEH enzyme activity. For this purpose, RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with 0.1 µM DNR. After 24 h, the cells were incubated with 50 μM AA for 3 h, and DHET/EET metabolites were measured using LC–ESI–MS. Our results showed that treatment of RL-14 cells with DNR significantly induced the 11,12-DHET/EET metabolites by about 200% in comparison with control (Fig. 7 a). Fig. 7 Effect of tAUCB on DNR-mediated effect on sEH enzyme activity. a RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with 0.1 µM DNR. After 24 h, the cells were incubated with 50 μM AA for 3 h, and DHET/EET metabolites were measured using LC–ESI–MS. b RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with 0.1 µM DNR in the presence and absence of 1 μM tAUCB. After 24 h, the cells were incubated with 50 μM AA for 3 h, and 11,12-DHET/EET metabolite was determined by LC–ESI–MS. c RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with 0.1 µM DOX in the presence and absence of 1 μM 11,12-EET. After 24 h, the mRNA level of β-MHC/α-MHC was quantified using real-time PCR. The results are presented as the means of six independent experiment ± SEM. + p < 0.05 compared to control. * p < 0.05 compared to DNR
In an attempt to explore whether tAUCB is able to inhibit the increase in sEH enzyme activity in response to DNR, 11,12-DHET/EET metabolites were determined by LC–ESI–MS. Figure 7 b shows that treatment of RL-14 cells with DNR significantly increased the formation of 1,12-DHET/EET metabolite by approximately 200% in comparison with control. Importantly, treatment of RL-14 cells with 1 μM tAUCB significantly inhibited the formation of the 11,12-DHET/EET metabolites by about 80% in comparison with control (Fig. 7 b).
To investigate whether 11,12-EET is sufficient to prevent the toxic effect of DNR, RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with DNR in the presence and absence of 11,12-EET. After 24 h, the mRNA levels of β-MHC/α-MHC were determined using real-time PCR. Figure 7 c shows that DNR alone caused a significant induction of β-MHC/α-MHC expression by approximately 1.5-fold of induction in comparison with control (Fig. 7 c). Importantly, treatment with 11,12-EET significantly blocked the effect of DNR on β-MHC/α-MHC (Fig. 7 c).
Effect of tAUCB on DNR-Mediated Effect on MAPKs Signaling Pathway
To assess the role of MAPK signaling pathway on the tAUCB-induced cardioprotection, RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with 0.1 µM DNR in the presence and absence of 1 μM tAUCB. Thereafter, phosphorylated MAPK levels were determined using a commercially available kit. Although incubation of the cells with 0.1 µM of DNR did not significantly change the phosphorylation of p38, JNK and ERK1/2 in comparison with control, treatment with tAUCB significantly reduced the phosphorylated p38 by approximately 30% in comparison with control (Fig. 8 ). Our results suggest an important role of phosphorylated p38 on tAUCB-mediated protection against DNR-induced cardiotoxicity. Fig. 8 Effect of tAUCB on DNR-mediated effect on MAPKs signaling pathway. RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with 0.1 µM DNR in the presence and absence of 1 μM tAUCB. Thereafter, a phosphorylated p38, b phosphorylated JNK in addition to c phosphorylated ERK1/2 levels were determined using a commercially available kit. The results are presented as the means of six independent experiment ± SEM. + p < 0.05 compared to control. * p < 0.05 compared to DNR
Effect of tAUCB on DNR-Mediated Effect on NF-κB Signaling Pathway
To examine the role of NF-κB signaling pathway on the tAUCB-induced cardioprotection, RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with 0.1 µM DNR in the presence and absence of 1 μM tAUCB. Thereafter, NF-κB binding activity was determined using a commercially available kit. Figure 9 shows that DNR alone was not able to significantly change the binding activity of NF-κB to its responsive element in comparison with control. However, treatment with tAUCB significantly increased the NF-κB P50 binding activity by approximately 600% in comparison with control suggesting that NF-κB P50 is essential for tAUCB-mediated protection against DNR-induced cardiotoxicity. Fig. 9 Effect of tAUCB on DNR-mediated effect on NF-κB signaling pathway. RL-14 cells were treated for 3 h with 0.1 µM DNR in the presence and absence of 1 μM tAUCB. Thereafter, a P65 NF-κB and b P50 NF-κB binding activity levels were determined using a commercially available kit. The results are presented as the means of six independent experiment ± SEM. + p < 0.05 compared to control. * p < 0.05 compared to DNR
In order to investigate whether tAUCB treatment attenuates DNR-mediated cardiotoxicity in rat, and the in vitro results could be extrapolated to in vivo, we conducted in vivo experiments using Sprague–Dawley rats as follows:
Effect of tAUCB on DNR-Mediated Cardiac Hypertrophy In Vivo in Rats
To investigate whether tAUCB confers cardioprotection against DNR-induced cardiotoxicity in rats, cardiotoxicity parameters were assessed by measuring HW/BW ratio. Figure 10 a shows that DNR significantly increased the HW/BW by approximately 30% in comparison with control, whereas treatment with tAUCB significantly inhibited the DNR-mediated increase in the HW/TL ratio. Furthermore, no significant differences were observed between the control and the tAUCB treatment alone (Fig. 10 a). Fig. 10 Effect of tAUCB on DNR-mediated cardiac hypertrophy in vivo in rats. Rats were injected with either DNR or vehicle in the presence and absence of tAUCB. Thereafter, a HW/BW ratio was determined. b Hypertrophic genes, β-MHC/α-MHC in addition to c fibrotic gene, IL6 were quantified by real-time PCR in rat heart. The results are presented as the means of four independent experiment ± SEM. + p < 0.05 compared to control. * p < 0.05 compared to DNR
To further confirm the protective effect of tAUCB against DNR-induced cardiotoxicity, we tested the effect of the tAUCB on DNR-mediated effect on hypertrophic marker, β-MHC/α-MHC, and fibrotic marker, IL-6, mRNA expressions. For this purpose, total RNA was extracted from the heart of treated rats and the mRNA levels of β-MHC/α-MHC and IL-6 were determined by real-time PCR. Figure 10 b, c shows that DNR alone caused a significant induction of β-MHC/α-MHC and IL-6 expressions by approximately threefold in comparison with control. Importantly, treatment with DNR significantly reduced the induction of β-MHC/α-MHC and IL-6 in response to DNR by about 1.8- and 1.6-fold, respectively, in comparison with control (Fig. 10 b, c).
Discussion
ANT such as DOX and DNR are anticancer antibiotics commonly used to treat different types of cancer like lymphoblastic, hematopoietic and a wide range of solid tumors, such as lung, breast and thyroid cancer [ ]. Although ANT has improved survival rates in cancer patients, cardiotoxicity has been reported as a significant adverse event [ , ]. While several studies have demonstrated a role for oxidative stress, apoptosis, mitochondrial damage in addition to the inhibition of topoisomerase II in ANT-induced cardiotoxicity, the exact mechanisms regulating the cardiotoxic effect of ANT remain unclear [ , , ]. Interestingly, we have demonstrated previously that DOX-induced cardiotoxicity through the modulation of CYP and its associated AA metabolites [ , ]. Taken together, the exact mechanism of DNR-induced cardiotoxicity and its progression to heart failure has not been fully elucidated yet and the role of CYP and its associated AA metabolites in DNR-induced cardiotoxicity could not be ruled out. Hence, the current study was conducted to examine whether the cardiotoxicity of DNR is due to the increased formation of the cardiotoxic HETEs and/or the decreased formation of the cardioprotective EETs metabolite at in vivo and in vitro levels.
The dose of DNR used in the current study was chosen based on previous report demonstrating that a single i.p. dose of daunorubicin (5 mg kg −1 ) in the rat is comparable with single doses of 30 mg/m 2 administered clinically [ , ]. Although the occurrence of ANT-induced acute myocardial injury following a single dose has been reported previously, it is considered as a rare form of cardiotoxicity [ , , , , ]. In the current study, our aim was to investigate the early myocardial changes in response to DNR before reaching the stage of heart failure and to explore whether CYP and their associated AA metabolites play a crucial role in the initiation of cardiotoxicity induced by DNR. The current study might be a helpful scalpel for dissecting CYP and their associated AA metabolites as a causal mechanism of DNR’s toxicity from being considered as an epiphenomenon and eventually it may provide a novel target for prevention of cardiotoxicity induced by DNR at early stages.
The induction of cardiotoxicity in response to DNR was evidenced by the following findings; first, the increase in HW/BW and HW/TL ratios; second, the induction of cardiac hypertrophic markers, ANP, BNP and β-MHC/α-MHC, in addition to fibrotic markers, TNF-α, IL6 and COX-2. Our results are in agreement with the observation that ANT’s cardiotoxicity is associated with the induction of cardiac hypertrophic and fibrotic markers [ , ]. Furthermore, acute DNR treatment has been reported to induce MHC isoform switching from α-MHC to β-MHC in rat cardiac tissues [ ]. Such effect not only confirms the cardiotoxicity induced by DNR but also it may suggest a detrimental effect of MHC isoform switching in the deteriorations of systolic function and contractile performances in response to DNR [ , , ].
Of particular interest in the current study, the induction of cardiotoxicity by DNR was associated with a dramatic decrease in the formation of the cardioprotective EET metabolites. The role of EETs in the protection against CVDs including heart failure and cardiomyopathy has been reported before [ ]. For example, it has been demonstrated that upregulation of EETs exert antihypertensive effect, improve endothelial function and reduce Ang-II- and ISO-induced cardiac hypertrophy [ , , ]. Furthermore, EET was shown to protect against DOX-induced mitochondrial damage and cardiotoxicity [ ]. Collectively, these results suggest an important role of EETs metabolite in DNR-induced cardiotoxicity.
EETs are known to be controlled by two major determinants, their synthesis by CYP epoxygenase and their degradation upon the induction of the sEH enzyme [ , ]. Therefore, the second objective of the current study was to investigate whether the decrease in the level of EETs by DNR is attributed to the inhibition of CYP epoxygenase and/or the induction of the sEH enzyme. In the current study, the DNR-induced cardiotoxicity was associated with a significant inhibition of the CYP2B enzyme. Similar to our observation, DOX has been shown to significantly decrease the expression of CYP2B protein level [ ]. Although the mechanism by which ANT mediates inhibition of CYP2B enzyme is still ambiguous, it has been postulated that the inhibition is attributed to ANT-induced inflammation [ ]. While CYP2B is an epoxygenase enzyme [ ], its inhibition may not contribute to the inhibition of EETs formation and toxicity induced by DNR. This is because we have demonstrated recently that EETs are not the major metabolites produced by CYP2B enzyme [ ]. Conversely, a cardiotoxic 20-HETE is produced more prominently by CYP2B enzyme [ ].
In contrast to what was observed with CYP2B, DNR causes a significant induction of the CYP2C protein expression level. Furthermore, the total epoxygenase activity was significantly upregulated in the heart tissue of DNR-treated rats in comparison with the control. Since CYP2C enzyme is considered as a major player in the formation of EETs [ , , ], the increase in the total epoxygenase activity in response to DNR is most likely attributed to the induction of the CYP2C protein level. Consistent with our findings, acute treatment of rats with DOX has been shown to induce the CYP2C protein and total epoxygenase activity levels [ ].
Despite the increase in the total epoxygenase activity, EETs formation is lower in the heart tissue of DNR-treated rats. Therefore, it was necessary to investigate the effect of acute DNR cardiotoxicity on the expression and activity of sEH which catalyzes the conversion of EETs to their corresponding inactive diols metabolites, DHETs [ , , ]. Our results clearly demonstrated that DNR caused a significant induction of sEH at mRNA, protein, and catalytic activity in cardiac tissues, which may explain the degradation of EETs in response to DNR treatment. Consistent with this notion, the induction of the sEH enzyme has been reported to contribute to the DOX-induced cardiotoxicity [ , ].
The direct evidence for the involvement of sEH in the development of cardiotoxicity induced by DNR was supported by the ability of tAUCB, a selective sEH inhibitor, to significantly inhibit the alteration in hypertrophic markers genes expression in response to DNR in vivo in rats and in vitro using RL-14 cells. Similar to our observation, it has been previously reported that sEH inhibitors protect cardiac-derived H9c2 cells from DOX-induced cellular toxicity [ ]. Furthermore, sEH inhibitor was shown to prevent and/or reverse the development of cardiac dysfunction induced in vivo by thoracic aortic constriction and in vitro by Ang-II [ , , ].
Mechanistically, the cardioprotective effect of tAUCB has been reported to be mediated through the modulation of the MAPK signaling pathway [ ]. Several studies have indicated that persistent activation of JNK and P38 by ANT promote apoptosis, resulting in cardiac dilation and dysfunction, whereas ERK1/2 has an antiapoptotic effect and regulates smooth muscle contraction [ , , ]. In this context, we demonstrated that the protective effect of tAUCB against DNR-induced cardiotoxicity was mediated through the inhibition of phosphorylated p38. In consistent with our finding, inhibition of sEH enzyme has been shown to inhibit Ang-II-induced cardiotoxicity through the suppression of phosphorylated p38 [ ]. Furthermore, 11,12-EET has been demonstrated to prevent cell toxicity through the inhibition of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase [ ]. On the other hand, overexpression of EPHX2 gene was shown to increase the phosphorylation of JNK and p38 [ ].
A wealth of information suggests a cardioprotective effect of P50 NF-κB against the toxic and apoptotic effect of many cardiotoxic insults [ , ]. For example, overexpression of P50 NF-κB subunit in H9c2 cells, a rat cardiomyoblast cell line, suppressed c-Rel-induced cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis [ ]. On the other hand, P50 NF-κB deficiency has been shown to increase cardiac remodeling and systolic dysfunction in response to myocardial ischemia [ ]. In the current study, we demonstrated that tAUCB mediates a protective effect against DNR-induced cardiotoxicity through the activation of P50 NF-κB binding activity. The induction of P50 NF-κB activity by tAUCB could be contributed to the upregulation of TNFα inhibitory factor (TIF) [ ]. TIF has been shown to cause a selective nuclear accumulation of P50 NF-κB homodimers [ ]. On the other hand, the negative effect of DNR alone on P50 NF-κB activity may be credited to two postulations. First, the concentration of DNR was not high enough to elicit changes in the activity of P50 NF-κB. The second postulation is that the toxic effect of DNR perhaps due to the induction of cell death signaling pathway rather than the inhibition of cell survival enzymes [ , , ].
In conclusion, our study provides the first evidence that DNR induces cardiotoxicity in vivo in a rat model and in vitro in human ventricular cardiomyocytes, RL-14 cell line, through a sEH-mediated EETs degradation-dependent mechanism.