Introduction
A growing body of evidence suggests that cardiac fibrosis is a major factor in the development of heart failure. Prevention of cardiac fibrosis is an important target in the treatment of heart failure. It has been previously reported that cell transplantation could attenuate cardiac fibrosis of the regionally impaired myocardium, especially prevailing after myocardial infarction [ ].
Administration of isoproterenol (ISP) can induce myocardial fibrosis and diffuse myocardial cell death contributing to progressive global heart failure, while retaining an intact coronary vasculature. For these reasons, the rat model of ISP-induced myocardial necrosis has often been used to evaluate cardiac dysfunctions, ventricular fibrosis and global heart failure. Oxidative stress, resulting from reduced levels of antioxidants and elevated levels of free radicals in cardiomyocytes plays an important role in cardiac diseases such as atherosclerosis, arrhythmias and cardiomyopathy. Damage to the myocardial cells develops as a result of the generation of toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as hydroxyl radical, superoxide radical and hydrogen peroxide [ ]. ISP is considered as a β-adrenergic agonist and a synthetic catecholamine. It has been previously reported to cause severe myocardium stress leading to infarct-like necrosis of the cardiomyocytes [ ]. ISP rapidly undergoes oxidation, and its oxidative products are responsible for cardiac dysfunction [ ].
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are undifferentiated cells that are able to clonally differentiate into cardiac myocytes, chondrocytes, osteoblasts and adipocytes [ ]. The multi-lineage potential of MSCs, their ability to escape detection by the host immune system upon transplantation and the relative ease of expansion in culture make MSCs a promising source of stem cells for transplantation [ ].
Heart problems including heart failure (HF) and myocardial infarction (MI) are considered to be a public health problem. Digoxin (DIG) is the commonly used drug for treatment of heart failure. However, it owns a narrow therapeutic index as it is accompanied by cardiotoxicity that may lead to death [ ]. Although, several phytochemicals, chelating agents and biological compounds have been tested periodically to avoid its toxicity, no alternative remedy is present that may be more potent and much safer than DIG. DIG markedly alleviated ISP-induced elevation in serum creatinine kinase-MB, lactate dehydrogenase and cardiac lipid peroxidation. Efficacy could be contributed to its ROS scavenging action and its structural specificity [ ]. Since MSCs are considered as a major source of regenerative therapy, the present work endeavored to identify a novel MSCs therapy targeted to alleviate cardiovascular diseases accompanied with lower toxic effect than DIG [ ].
Materials and Methods
Chemicals
Isoproterenol and digoxin were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co (St. Louis, MO, USA). Kits used were obtained from Randox Company (Antrim, UK). All other chemicals are of highest analytical grade.
Preparation of BM-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells from Rats
Bone marrow was harvested by flushing the tibiae and femurs of 6-week-old male white albino rats with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, GIBCO/BRL) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO/BRL). Nucleated cells were isolated and re-suspended in complete culture medium supplemented with 1% penicillin–streptomycin (GIBCO/BRL). The resulting cultures were referred to as first-passage cultures [ ].
Labeling of MSCs with PKH26
MSCs were labeled with PKH26 supplied by Sigma Company (Saint Louis, Missouri USA). Cells were injected intravenously into rat tail vein. After 1 month, heart tissues were examined with a fluorescence microscope to trace the cells.
Animals
Male Wistar albino rats, weighing 190–200 g, obtained from the animal house of National Research Center were used in this study. Animals were housed in cages kept at standardized conditions (22 ± 5 °C, 55 ± 5% humidity and 12 h light/dark cycle). They were allowed free access to water and pelleted standard chow diet. All procedures relating to animal care and treatments strictly adhered to the ethical procedures and policies approved by Animal Care and Use Committee of National Research Center (12-038).
Experimental Design
After 1 week of acclimatization, animals were randomly divided into four groups (ten rats each) and were divided according to the following schedule:
Group 1: Animals were treated by cell culture medium alone and served as control group.
Groups from 2 to 4: Animals were given two successive subcutaneous doses of isoproterenol (85 mg/kg) for 2 days [ ], and then the following regimen was applied:
Group 2: Isoproterenol-intoxicated animals were left untreated.
Group 3: Isoproterenol-intoxicated animals were treated with a single intravenous dose of mesenchymal stem cells (100 μl) of a cell suspension containing 5 × 10 6 allogeneic MSCs from rat at the moment of boost.
Group 4: Isoproterenol-intoxicated animals were treated with a daily oral dose of digoxin (100 mg/kg) for 1 month.
It is worthy to note that the selected dose of isoproterenol was previously reported to be the most effective in inducing myocardial infarction [ ].
Blood Sampling and Heart Tissue Preparation
At the end of the experiment, all groups were killed and blood samples were taken from each animal by puncture of the sublingual vein into sterilized tubes and let stand for 10 min to clot. Serum was separated by centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 10 min and kept at − 80 °C for further determinations. In the same time, heart tissue was removed carefully then rinsed with cold saline (0.9% sodium chloride), and homogenized in 50 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 (1:5 w/v). The homogenate was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C to separate cell debris. The supernatant was stored at − 80 °C for subsequent biochemical determinations of MDA, VCAM and ICAM. For histopathological examination, samples were fixed in 10% formalin.
Measured Parameters
Serum Aspartate Aminotransferases (AST) Activity
AST activity was estimated spectrophotometrically using commercially available kits provided from Randox Company (United Kingdom, Antrim; AS2359). In brief, in presence of AST, L-aspartate forms oxaloacetate and L-glutamate. In alkaline solution, the formed oxaloacetate reacts with 2,4-dinitrophenyl hydrazine to give the hydrazone derivative that can be measured at 540 nm [ ].
Cardiac Malondialdehyde (MDA) Level
MDA, as an index of lipid peroxidation, was measured using kit provided by Randox Company (Antrim, UK). MDA reacts with thiobarbituric acid (TBA) in acid medium giving a pink-colored complex that can be measured spectrophotometrically at 520 and 535 nm, using 1, 1, 3, 3-tetramethoxypropane as standard [ ].
Cardiac VCAM and ICAM Levels
The cardiac levels of VCAM and ICAM were measured using ELISA kits (R &D systems MN, USA; #112731and # BAF583, respectively) at optical density 490. All the procedures were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The assays of these cytokines employ the quantitative sandwich enzyme immunoassay technique. Specific antibodies were pre-coated onto the microplate. The standards and samples were pipetted into the wells, and the cytokines were bound by the immobilized antibody. After washing away any unbound substances, an enzyme-linked secondary antibody specific for VCAM or ICAM was added to the wells. Following color development, the assay was stopped, and the absorbance was read at 450 nm. The intensity of the color was proportional to the amount of the corresponding VCAM or ICAM bound in the initial step [ ].
Quantitative Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (qRT-PCR) for Analysis of Cardiac Nuclear-Related Factor-2 (Nrf2), Toll-Like Receptor-4 (TLR-4) and p53 mRNA Expression
The heart tissues were homogenized using QIAzol lysis reagent with a Tissue Ruptor (Roche). Total RNA was isolated using Tripure Isolation Reagent (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was generated using Superscript Choice systems (Life Technologies, Breda, Netherlands) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To assess the mRNA expression of Nrf2, TLR-4 and p53, quantitative real-time PCR was performed using SYBR green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA) as described by the manufacturer. Briefly, in a 25-μl reaction volume, 5 μl of cDNA was added to 12.5 μl of 2× SYBR green Master Mix and 200 ng of each primer. The sequences of primers are described in Table 1 . The temperature profile was as follows: 94 °C for 3 min, 94 °C for 20 s, 60 °C for 20 s and 72 °C for 20 s for 35 cycles [ ]. The expression level was calculated from the PCR cycle number (CT) where the increased fluorescence curve passes across a threshold value. Table 1 RT-PCR primers used in the gene expression analysis Gene name Primer sequence Primer size (bp) Refer-actin F GAGACCTTCAACACCCCAGC R ATGTCACGCACGATTTCCC 263 Nrf2 F GGACATGGATyyTACTCCCAGGTACACTT R AGGTTGCCCACyyGACCATGAGGTATA 267 TLR4 F5′CTCACAACTTCAGTGGCTGGATTTA’3 R5′GTCTCCACAGCCACCAGATTCTC’3 329 P53 F 5′-CAGCGTGA TGATGGTAA GGA-’3 R 5′-GCGTTGCTCTGATGGTGA-’3 129
Western Blot of Cardiac Nrf2 Protein Expressions
Protein of Nrf2 was loaded onto a SDS-PAGE which allows separation of proteins according to their molecular weight and then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane for subsequent primary antibody against Nrf2 at 1:1000 (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA, USA; #14596) detection of the protein. The membranes then incubated with a secondary horseradish peroxidase conjugated antibody (1:25 000, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) [ ].
Histopathological Examination
Paraffin-embedded samples were prepared for sectioning at 4 μm thickness. Slides were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and examined by light microscope [ ].
Statistical Analysis
Data were expressed as mean ± SEM. Statistical analysis was performed using Instat-3 computer program (Graph pad software Inc, San Diego, CA, USA). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) by SPSS 16 program was performed followed by post hoc at p < 0.05 using Tukey’s test.
Results
Seeding of MSC Labeled with PKH26 Fluorescent Dye in Heart Tissue
MSC labeled with PKH26 fluorescent dye in heart tissue showed strong red autofluorescence post-transplantation into rats, confirming that these cells were seeded into the heart tissue to replace the injured cardiomyocytes (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Labeling of MSCs with PKH26. Detection of MSCs labeled with PKH26 fluorescent dye in whole heart tissue ( a ), with phase contrast showed that MSCs distributed in and around striated muscle of heart tissue ( b )
Inhibition of Isoproterenol-Induced Cardiotoxicity
As shown in Table 2 and Fig. 2 , isoproterenol intoxication increased significantly serum levels of AST, CK-MB and troponin II by 489.8, 689.4 and 284.1%, respectively, as compared to the control value. On the other hand, in groups given stem cells and digoxin, the levels of cardiac enzymes were comparatively lower than the isoproterenol-intoxicated group, implying the possible therapeutic effects of these agents on cardiac infraction. Interestingly, the tested parameters were reverted back to near normal when stem cells and digoxin were administered, while stem cells regimen showed the most significant effect regarding troponin. Table 2 Effect of mesenchymal stem cells and digoxin on serum AST and MDA activities in ISP-intoxicated rats Parameter Groups Control Isoproterenol Isoproterenol + stem cells Isoproterenol + digoxin AST (U/L) 43.2 ± 0.14 a 64.6 ± 0.01 b 43.1 ± 0.11 a 44.1 ± 0.13 a MDA (nMol/ml) 14.3 ± 0.12 a 49.13 ± 0.15 b 16.95 ± 0.13 a 33.04 ± 0.11 c Values are expressed as mean ± S.E.M. ( n = 10). p value < 0.05 is considered significant. Groups having different letters are significantly from each other, while those having the same letter are not significantly different from each other Fig. 2 Effect of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and digoxin (DIG) on serum levels of cardiac troponin (cTR) and creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) following isoproterenol (ISP) administration. Data are expressed as mean ± S.E.M ( n = 10). p value < 0.05 is considered significant. Groups having the same letter are not significantly different from each other, while those having different letters are significantly different from each other
Modulation of Oxidative Stress Biomarkers
Isoproterenol intoxication induced a state of oxidative stress evidenced by a reduction in the gene and protein expression of cardiac Nrf2 along with an increment of MDA level as compared to the control (Table 1 ; Fig. 3 a, b). Administration of stem cells and digoxin significantly reduced MDA values reaching 68.8 and 61.09%, respectively, as compared to isoproterenol-intoxicated group. Obviously, stem cell regimen reduced MDA level by almost threefold relative to isoproterenol group, thus displaying the most pronounced effect than digoxin. Furthermore, the data presented in Fig. 3 a, b and Table 3 revealed that isoproterenol intoxication down-regulated the gene and protein expression of Nrf2 by almost 19.6-fold as compared to the control value. Meanwhile, administration of stem cells and digoxin noticeably up-regulated its expression level with the stem cells regimen showing more significant effect in comparison with animals treated only with isoproterenol. Fig. 3 a Effect of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and digoxin (DIG) on cardiac mRNA expression of nuclear-related factor-2 (Nrf2) following isoproterenol (ISP) administration. β-Actin was used as an internal control for calculating mRNA fold changes. Data are expressed as mean ± S.E.M ( n = 10). p value < 0.05 is considered significant. Groups having the same letter are not significantly different from each other, while those having different letters are significantly different from each other. b Western blot of Nrf2 protein expression in heart tissue of control group, isoproterenol (ISP)-intoxicated rats, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)-treated group and digoxin-treated group. β -actin was used as a reference standard Table 3 Western blot analysis of Nrf2 protein expression in heart tissue of control group, isoproterenol (ISP)-intoxicated rats, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)-treated group and digoxin-treated group Parameter Groups Control Isoproterenol Isoproterenol + Stem cells Isoproterenol + Digoxin Nrf2 protein expression 1 ± 0.12 a 0.2 ± 0.01 b 0.34 ± 0.02 b 0.5 ± 0.03 b β -actin was used as a reference standard Values are expressed as mean ± S.E.M. ( n = 10). p value < 0.05 is considered significant. Groups having different letters are significantly from each other, while those having the same letter are not significantly different from each other
Effect of Stem Cells and Digoxin on TLR-4 Expression and Inflammatory Cytokines
The data in Figs. 4 and 7 indicated that isoproterenol intoxication caused a significant up-regulation in mRNA level of TLR-4 by almost 1631-fold as compared to the control value. Nevertheless, a significant down-regulation was apparent in mice treated with stem cells and digoxin. Besides, stem cell regimen considerably reversed the level of TLR-4 declared greater down-regulation as compared with digoxin. Fig. 4 Effect of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and digoxin (DIG) on cardiac mRNA expression of toll-like receptor-4 (TLR-4) following isoproterenol (ISP) administration. β-Actin was used as an internal control for calculating mRNA fold changes. Data are expressed as mean ± S.E.M ( n = 10). p value < 0.05 is considered significant. Groups having the same letter are not significantly different from each other, while those having different letters are significantly different from each other
As shown in Fig. 5 , the cardiac levels of VCAM and ICAM were significantly increased in isoproterenol group, reaching 726.9 and 585.9%, respectively, as compared to the normal control. Administration of stem cells and digoxin reduced significantly these levels compared to isoproterenol-intoxicated group. These reductions were amounted to 315 and 167.2% for stem cell group, 407.6 and 288.4% for digoxin group. Meanwhile, when the stem cells were administered, the amount of decrease was augmented. Fig. 5 Effect of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and digoxin (DIG) on cardiac levels of vascular cell adhesion molecules (VCAM) and intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAM) following isoproterenol (ISP) administration. Eliza kits measured at 490 OD. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM ( n = 10). p value < 0.05 is considered significant. Groups having the same letter are not significantly different from each other, while those having different letters are significantly different from each other
Effect of Stem Cells and Digoxin on Apoptosis
As shown in Figs. 6 and 7 , isoproterenol intoxication produced a significant down-regulation in mRNA gene expression of p53 level by almost 29 folds as compared to the control values. Fig. 6 Effect of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and digoxin (DIG) on cardiac mRNA expression of P53 following isoproterenol (ISP) administration. β-Actin was used as an internal control for calculating mRNA fold changes. Data are expressed as mean ± S.E.M ( n = 10). p value < 0.05 is considered significant. Groups having the same letter are not significantly different from each other, while those having different letters are significantly different from each other Fig. 7 Electrophoresis of toll-like receptor 4 and P53 in ISP group and groups treated with MSCs and digoxin
Administration of stem cells and digoxin counteracted this change by causing a significant elevation in P53 level with the stem cell group displaying the most significant effect compared to isoproterenol-intoxicated group.
Histopathological Findings
Figure 8 showed that isoproterenol-intoxicated group displayed loss of myofibrils and vacuolization of the cytoplasm, disruption of medial elastic fibers with diffuse interstitial fibrosis and myocytolysis perivascular cuffing of vasa vasorum with intimal fibrosis; meanwhile, stem cells and digoxin groups showed regeneration of many of degenerated cardiocytes with apparently normal heart architecture in stem cell group. Fig. 8 Histopathology of heart section stained with H & E, ×200, ×400, showing sections ( a –d) where a is −ve control (healthy group) showing normal morphological appearance with normal myocardial (muscle fibers) as cardiac muscle with striation, cardiac muscle with branching pattern of muscle fibers (yellow arrow), central placed nuclei (black arrow) and the intercalated disk (red arrow), b is +ve control isoproterenol-intoxicated group showing loss of myofibrils and vacuolization of the cytoplasm, disruption of medial elastic fibers with diffuse interstitial fibrosis and myocytolysis (red arrow) perivascular cuffing of vasa vasorum with intimal fibrosis (black arrow), c Treated group by stem cell showing myocardial (muscle fibers) as cardiac muscle with striation, cardiac muscle with branching pattern of muscle fibers (yellow arrow), central placed nuclei (black arrow), and the intercalated disk (red arrow) and d is treated group by digoxin (standard drug) showing cardiac muscle with striation, cardiac muscle with branching pattern of muscle fibers (red arrow), central placed nuclei (black arrow) and the intercalated disk (yellow arrow) (Color figure online)
Discussion
Regenerative medicine is a new era of medicine with the goal to renew damaged tissues and organs. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) represent a heterogeneous undifferentiated cell population that is promising for regenerative medicine. The relative ease of expansion in culture, the multi-lineage potential of MSCs and their ability to escape detection by the host immune system upon transplantation make MSCs a promising source of transplanted stem cells [ ]. MSCs are characterized by high plasticity and self-renewability. Moreover, they can clonally differentiate into neurons, chondrocytes, osteoblasts, hepatocytes and cardiomyocytes [ ].
A comparative study was conducted herein to investigate the ability of transplanted MSCs and digoxin treatment to alleviate myocardial infarction (MI) induced by ISP in rats and to investigate the mechanisms that may mediate this action.
The current study revealed that isoproterenol administration elevated serum level of AST as well as CK-MB and cardiac troponin II as compared to the control value. Increased cardiac enzymes were suggested to cellular leakage and loss of functional integrity of heart cell membranes indicating ISP-induced necrosis of the myocardium and leakiness of the plasma membrane [ ]. Moreover, it may be contributed to ISP-induced lipid peroxidation and generation of free radicals, which are involved in the damage of myocardial membranes [ ]. Heart injury was also confirmed histopathologically by the loss of myofibrils and vacuolization of the cytoplasm, with the propagation of diffuse interstitial fibrosis of cardiocytes in the ISP-intoxicated group. This also coincide with the study which reported that ISP showed a significant increase in heart rate and a significant increase in serum levels of cardiac marker enzymes (LDH, CK and AST) [ ].
Stem cell transplantation and digoxin treatment significantly reduced cardiac marker enzymes as compared to the ISP-intoxicated group. This reduction reflected the cardioprotective effect of these agents. It has been formerly documented that digoxin could ameliorate cardiac ISP-induced increase in CK-MB, AST and LDH levels, suggesting the antiperoxidative and the free radicals scavenging action of DIG.
Nrf2 is present in an inactive form in cytoplasm under normal conditions, as it is bound to Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (keap1). Increased ROS production, as evidenced by high MDA and low GSH levels, leads to the activation of Nrf2 transcription factor via its freeing from Nrf2/keap1 complex. The free Nrf2 is subsequently translocated into the nucleus where it binds to the antioxidant responsive element and transcriptionally activates downstream target genes including those of antioxidant enzymes [ ].
Oxidative stress, owing to increased production of free radicals and decreased levels of antioxidants in the myocardium plays a major role in cardiovascular diseases such as ischemic heart disease, atherosclerosis, congestive heart failure, cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias. Damage to the myocardial cells arises due to the generation of toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide radical, hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radical [ ]. Isoproterenol{4-[1-hydroxy-2-(1-methylethylamino) ethyl] benzene-1,2-diol} (ISP) a synthetic catecholamine and β-adrenergic agonist, has been found to cause myocardium infraction. The rat model of ISP-induced myocardial necrosis has often been used to evaluate several cardiac dysfunctions. ISP rapidly undergoes auto-oxidation, and it has been suggested that the oxidative products of catecholamines are responsible for changes in the myocardium [ ].
Lipid peroxidation (LPO) is a well-established mechanism of cellular injury and has been used as an indicator of oxidative stress that leads to the pathogenesis of myocardial infarction. Lipid peroxide-mediated myocardial damage has been observed in ISP-treated myocardial-infracted rats. The myocardial necrosis observed in the rats receiving ISP can be attributed to peroxidative damage, as it has been previously reported that ISP generates lipid peroxides [ , ]. In this context, the present study elucidated that the administration of isoproterenol caused a significant elevation in the cardiac MDA level along with a significant reduction in Nrf2 level, indicating that hearts of isoproterenol-intoxicated rats undergo severe oxidative stress.
Previous studies have noticed cardiac dysfunction, inflammatory cascade and histopathological changes in the heart tissue as a result of ISP injection that significantly reduced SOD, CAT activities and increased vascular reactivity to various catecholamines and these concur with our findings [ ]. Increased LPO appears to be the initial stage of the pathogenesis making heart tissue more susceptible to oxidative damage. The oxidative stress may be exerted through quinone metabolites of ISP that react with oxygen to produce superoxide anions and other reactive oxygen species (ROS) that interfere with antioxidant enzymes [ ].
The presence of the endogenous antioxidant enzymatic defense is highly important for the neutralization of oxygen-free-radical-mediated tissue injury.GSH, Nrf2, SOD and GPx, which are the primary free radical scavenging enzymes, are involved in the first-line cellular defense against oxidative injury, decomposing oxygen (O 2 ) and hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) before their interaction to form the more reactive hydroxyl radical. To sum up, previous studies on the role of inflammatory and oxidative stress markers bring new insights into some elements of the complex pathogenesis of heart failure. It seems that the simultaneous measurement of several heart failure biomarkers, with proper clinical assessment of the patient, can be of help in estimating the risk of heart failure as well as in predicting the probability of future cardiovascular events [ ].
In this study, the significant lower activity of Nrf2 in the heart tissues of ISP-treated rats when compared to control rats may be due to their increased utilization for scavenging ROS and their inactivation by excessive ISP oxidation [ ].
Moreover, stem cells transplantation and digoxin treatment showed a significant elevation in Nrf2 activity. However, they showed a significant reduction in MDA level.
In harmony, Berglund and Ohlsson, 1993 [ ], have found that the primary molecular mechanism contributing to digoxin protective action against myocardial infarction could be its free radical quenching and/or antiperoxidative activity through an increase in cardiac antioxidants and glutathione content. Interestingly, digoxin could also ameliorate the adverse effects induced by ISP including the alterations in cardiac LPO and the status of antioxidants such as SOD, CAT, GST, GPx and GSH suggesting an antiperoxidative and/or direct free radicals scavenging action of digoxin.
Activation of the innate immunity resulting in inflammation is an adaptive response for the elimination of invading microorganisms or regeneration of normal tissue functions after damage. However, continuous stimulation of the innate immunity may cause inflammatory diseases. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) which are widely distributed in immune cells as well as in other cell types are key sensors of the innate immunity. Activation of TLRs results from binding to microbial toxins or pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) [ ]. The TLR-associated complex further stimulates downstream signaling cascades resulting in the activation of MAPKs and kinases, allowing NF-κB translocation to the nucleus, where it binds to the promoters of target genes, including TNF -α, MIP - 2 , IκB -α and cellular inhibitor of apoptosis, activating their transcription [ ].
Pro-inflammatory processes initiated in the endothelium represent a crucial step in the pathogenesis of inflammatory cardiovascular disease, such as atherosclerosis. In molecular biology, intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAMs) and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) are part of the immunoglobulin super family. They are important in inflammation, immune responses and in intracellular signaling events [ ].
Herein, ISP showed a significant up-regulation in TLR4, VCAM and ICAM which were down-regulated post-stem cells and digoxin treatment this is in harmony with the study which reported the significant elevation in the levels of TLR4, TNF-α and IL-6 in the heart tissues of ISP-intoxicated rats [ ].
This was also highlighted by the study which reported that MSCs, like immune cells, can respond to different ‘danger’ signals that are generated at injured sites as result of inflammation, even in cases when inflammation occurs aseptically, as in the case of ischemia and autoimmune diseases. MSCs accomplish this feature by expressing different Toll-like receptors (TLR), whose activation leads to significant cellular changes on MSCs [ ]. MSCs down-regulated the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-1β [ ] and up-regulated renal TGF-α and Bcl-2 in rats. MSCs when exposed to inflammatory cytokines, they express known adhesion molecules such as VCAM-1 and ICAM-113, which enables MSCs to sequester and modulate immune cells [ ].
Previous observations pointed to the potential anti-inflammatory and vasoprotective properties of digoxin which potently inhibited the IL-1beta-induced expression of MCP-1 and VCAM-1 in endothelium cells. Furthermore, digoxin prevented the IL-1beta-induced activation of p44/42-MAPK and NF-kappa B and elicited anti-inflammatory property by blocking NF-κB and activating PI-3-kinase/Akt signaling as well as Ca(2 +)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase-II in endothelium cells in patients [ ].
The transcriptional factor p53 induces the expression of a number of downstream target genes involved in apoptosis, DNA repair and cell cycle arrest. In normal cells, p53 is maintained at low levels, primarily via the actions of its negative regulator, murine double minute (Mdm2), an E3 ubiquitin ligase. In response to cellular stresses and DNA damage, p53 is phosphorylated by ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia, mutated), ATR (ATM and Rad3 related) and/or ChK1/2 (checkpoint kinase 1/2). Phosphorylated p53 disrupts interactions between p53 and Mdm2, leading to p53 stabilization and increased transcriptional activity. Nutlin-3a stabilizes p53 without inducing DNA damage and has been shown to enhance p53 activity, such as induction of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest of cancer cells [ ].
Apoptosis of cardiac myocytes is one of the causes of heart failure. In the current investigation, ISP caused a significant down-regulation of P53 level as compared to control group. This finding coincides with the study which reported that the activation of β-adrenergic receptor induces cardiac apoptosis. ISP induced the apoptosis of cardiomyocytes of neonatal rats through increasing intracellular Ca 2+ levels and reducing the phosphorylation of Bcl-2 [ ].
Treatment with stem cells and digoxin alleviated this change. Shuichi et al. [ ] have reported that the protective effect of digoxin was mediated via the reduction of ROS production and the attenuation of apoptosis via modulating the Na + /K + -ATPase protein complex and increasing Ca 2+ . The depletion of p53 caused by digoxin involved the inhibition of protein synthesis and transcription via down-regulation of SRSF3 that convert p53α to p53β. In addition, MSCs resulted in the down-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-1β, as well as Bcl-2 in renal tissue which may be contributed to its paracrine action [ ].
Conclusion
Stem cells regimen showed a significant improvement in cardiac function, oxidative stress markers and inflammatory markers as well as apoptotic markers. Furthermore, stem cell showed promising results and is recommended to be as a novel therapy for myocardial infarction with less toxic effects on heart function.