Introduction
Myocardial infarction (MI) is one of the leading causes of deaths, and every year 16.7 million people die because of cardiovascular diseases [ ]. Following MI, cardiomyocytes irreversibly damage, ultimately leading to heart failure. The general notion that cardiomyocytes in adult hearts cannot regenerate is changed significantly in recent years [ , ]. It has been postulated that post-mitotic cardiomyocytes have the capability to proliferate when stimulated properly by the extracellular signals [ , ].
Periostin, a 90-kDa secreted protein, a member of the extracellular matrix with 4 repetitive fasciclin domains, is associated with epithelial mesenchymal transition during cardiac development [ , ]. Periostin is upregulated in the infarct region of human, mouse, and rat hearts following MI [ , ]. Recent studies indicated that periostin treatment may induce endogenous cardiomyocyte proliferation and enhance regenerative potential of mature cardiomyocytes [ ]. However, the mechanism of its action on cardiomyocytes and effects on cardiac genes during the post-infarction period is not fully investigated. Isoproterenol (ISO) is well-known synthetic β adrenergic agonist widely used in rats to induce myocardial necrosis similar to human myocardial infarction lesions [ ].
In the present study, we utilized a rat model of myocardial infarction focusing on changes in the expression of multiple genes during the healing process starting from day 1 to day 28 of post-myocardial damage, as the molecular mechanisms that regulate cardiac gene expression in the pathogenesis of cardiac remodeling are not yet adequately elucidated.
Materials and Methods
Animals
A total of 84 adult (6 months old) male Sprague Dawley rats, weighing 210–220 g, were used in this study. Rats were purchased from a private company (Kobay D.H.L. Inc, Ankara, Turkey). All animals were fed with standard rat chow and water ad libitum. Animals were kept in a temperature-controlled environment (+21 ± 1 °C) with an alternating cycle of 12-h light and dark and relative humidity of 50 ± 5%. The experimental design and procedures were approved by the Institutional Ethical Committee for Animal Care and Use at the Mehmet Akif Ersoy University, Burdur, Turkey (File No: 93773921-27).
Experimental Design
The experiment was performed on 84 male rats (6 months old) in 4 groups, each containing 21 rats. Experimental setup details are given in Table 1 . Saline was applied subcutaneously (1 ml/kg) two times with 24-h intervals to the rats in control group (Group 1). Recombinant periostin peptide (1 μg/kg) dissolved in saline applied intraperitoneally to Group 2 on days 1, 3, 7, 14, and 21 on same dates with Group 4. Isoproterenol dissolved in saline was applied intraperitoneally (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, Product code: I6504, 85 mg/kg/day) two times with 24-h intervals to the Groups 3 and 4. Rats in Group 4 further received recombinant periostin peptide (Biovision, Milpitas, California USA, Product code; 4205; 1 μg/kg) dissolved in saline intraperitoneally starting 1 day after the final isoproterenol administration on days 1, 3, 7, 14, and 21. Following the final application of periostin, rats continued to feed routinely with pelleted chow and water ad libitum for further 7 days. At the end of the day 7, rats were weighed and killed by cervical dislocation. Following the kill, the hearts were weighed and divided equally by cutting horizontally through interventricular septa. Half of the hearts were immediately fixed in phosphate-buffered 10% formalin for the histopathological and immunohistochemical analyses. Remaining parts were immediately immersed in RNAlater tissue storage solution 10 times volume of the tissue and stored −24 °C. Table 1 Details of the experimental setup, groups and subgroups, applied chemicals, dosages, and duration of the experiment Group subgroup Rat ( n ) Chemical applied Dosage Isoprotrenol application days Periostin application days Sampling days rat ( n ) 0 1 1 3 7 14 21 1 7 28 1a, b, c 21 S 1 ml/kg-IP S S S S S S S 7 7 7 2a, b, c 21 P 1 μg/kg-IP – – P P P P P 7 7 7 3a, b, c 21 I 85 mg/kg-IP I I – – – – – 7 7 7 4a, b, c 21 I + P 85 mg/kg + 1 µg/kg-IP I I P P P P P 7 7 7 S saline, P periostin, I isoproterenol, IP intraperitoneal application
Histopathology
Heart tissues were routinely processed and embedded in paraffin. Tissue blocks were sectioned at a thickness of 5 μm using conventional techniques. All sections were stained with Masson’s trichrome and hematoxylin and eosin (HE). Histopathological changes occurred in the hearts such as tissue necrosis, fibrosis, edema, and angiogenesis were evaluated. In addition, the damage seen in the cardiomyocytes (degeneration, necrosis, inflammatory cell infiltration, etc.) assessed semiquantitatively and results were reflected as % (Table 2 ). Furthermore, tissue sections were stained with Masson’s trichrome to determine changes in the collagen synthesis during the healing and reconstruction process upon heart tissue damage was evaluated semiquantitatively and the amount of collagen was compared to normal heart parenchyma tissue and the data were expressed as %. Table 2 Scoring criteria for the tissue necrosis, fibrosis, and inflammatory cell infiltration detected on the heart tissue parenchyma Scoring Histopathological findings Normal (0%) Normal heart with no detectable histopathological change Mild (<25%) Focal cardiomyocyte damage or limited multifocal degeneration on cardiomyocytes accompanied by mild inflammatory cell infiltration Moderate (26–50%) Degeneration and/or necrosis of the cardiomyocytes with or without inflammatory cell infiltration Severe (>51%) Degeneration and/or necrosis of the cardiomyocyes with or without inflammatory cell infiltration
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical staining was performed on 5-μm sections using the streptavidin–biotin–peroxidase system (Zymed Laboratories, Inc.; San Francisco, CA, USA) for detection of antibodies details of which are given in Table 3 . Sections were dewaxed in xylene and hydrated through graded alcohols. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with H 2 O 2 3% in absolute methanol for 10 min. All sections were preincubated in blocking solution (Zymed Laboratories) at room temperature for 10 min to block nonspecific binding of the second-step antibody (Zymed Laboratories). The sections were rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.2) and subsequently heated (600 W in a microwave oven) in citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 10 min for antigen retrieval. After washing with PBS, the sections were incubated with the primary antibody overnight at 4 °C and then rinsed with PBS of pH 7.4 at room temperature. The sections were then incubated with biotin-conjugated second-step antibody (Zymed Laboratories) for 30 min at room temperature. The sections were rinsed with PBS and incubated with the streptavidin–biotin–peroxidase complex (SABC) (Zymed Laboratories) for 30 min at room temperature. Labeling was “visualized” with 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole (AEC; Zymed Laboratories) as the chromogen. Sections were counterstained briefly with Harris hematoxylin. Primary antibodies were omitted from negative control sections, which were incubated with either PBS or diluted normal serum from the species in which the primary antibody was raised. Table 3 Details of the primary antibodies used for IHC Antibody Dilution Host/isotype/immunogen Source/product code TGF-β1 1/100 Rabbit PAb, IgG, Human Santa Cruz, (V): sc-146 Bcl-2 1/100 Rabbit PAb, IgG, Human Santa Cruz, (N-19): sc-492 Bax 1/100 Rabbit PAb, IgG, Human Santa Cruz, (P-19): sc-526 cTnI 1/200 Rabbit PAb, IgG, Human Santa Cruz, (H-170): sc-15368 cKit (CD117) 1/100 Rabbit PAb, IgG, Human Santa Cruz, (H-300): sc-5535 FGF-2 1/100 Goat PAb, IgG, Human Santa Cruz, (147): sc-79-G VEGF-A 1/100 Goat PAb, IgG, Human Santa Cruz, (A-20): sc-152-G ANGPT-2 1/100 Mouse MAb, IgG1, Human Santa Cruz, (F-1): sc-74403 cTnT 1/100 Mouse MAb, IgG1, Rabbit Thermo Scientific, MA5-12960 CDK2 1/200 Mouse MAb, IgG2b, Human Thermo Scientific, MA5-13479 PCNA 1/100 Rabbit PAb, IgG, Human Thermo Scientific, PA5-27214 Ki-67 1/100 Rabbit PAb, IgG, Human Thermo Scientific, PA5-19462 Phospho-histone H3 (H3P) 1/100 Rabbit PAb, IgG Human Thermo Scientific, PA5-17869 Cyclin D1 1/100 Rabbit PAb, IgG, Human Thermo Scientific, PA1-37530 Cdc2 1/200 Rabbit PAb, IgG, Human Thermo Scientific, PA1-30392 CD45 1/100 Rabbit PAb, IgG, Human Abcam, ab10558 Periostin 1/200 Rabbit PAb, IgG, Human Abcam, ab14041 Cardiac myosin heavy chain 1/400 Mouse MAb, IgG1, Human Abcam, ab15 Cyclin D2 1/200 Rabbit PAb IgG, Human Abbiotec, 251517 Alpha-sarcomeric actin 1/1000 Mouse MAb, IgG1, Rabbit Sigma-Aldrich, A7811
Semiquantitative Scoring of the TGF-β1, FGF-2, VEGF-A, ANGPT-2, Periostin, cTnI, cTnT, Cardiac Myosin Heavy Chain (CMhc), Alpha-Sarcomeric Actin (ASA), Cyclin D1, Cyclin D2, Cdc2, and CDK2 Immunolabeling
Representative tissue sections were scored blindly for immunolabeling on a semiquantitative scale. For quantification of immunolabeling, an area with the highest density of staining was selected. The intensity of reactivity in the cardiac tissue parenchyma was evaluated at 400 final magnification using grids of 100 squares and 10 adjacent fields that together constituted an area of 0.025 mm 2 . Immunohistochemical labeling intensity was quantified using an intensity score: 0, negative; 1, weak; 2, moderate; 3, intense. Next, the immunoreactive score (IRS) was obtained by multiplying the immunolabeling intensity score (range 0–3) times the immunoreactivity extension values (the percentage “%” of immunolabeling observed in a total area of 0.025 mm 2 ). The final IRS ranged from 0 to 300. The maximum final immunoreaction score of 300 was obtained by multiplying the percentage of maximum area of staining (100%) times the maximum immunolabeling intensity score, which was graded as 3 (intense).
Quantitative Scoring of the Immunolabeling for the Ki-67, PCNA, H3P, ckit (CD117), and CD45 Immunolabeling
Ki-67, PCNA, and H3P antibodies used for the detection of DNA synthesis, cell proliferation, and mitosis occurred in cardiomyocytes and/or myofibroblasts, while Bcl-2 and Bax antibodies used for determination of sensitivity or resistance to apoptosis. In this context, cardiac tissue sections were also stained with alpha-sarcomeric actin to confirm whether DNA synthesis and cell proliferation occurred in cardiomyocytes. Alpha isoform of sarcomeric actin is specific only for alpha-heart muscle actin and does not react with smooth muscle actin.
Grading of Ki-67, PCNA, and H3P immunoreactivity was based on the number of positive cells in the examined field. For quantification of immunolabeling, an area with the highest density of staining was selected. The number of positive cells quantified in the cardiac tissue parenchyma was evaluated at 400 final magnification using grids of 100 squares and 10 adjacent fields that together constituted an area of 0.025 mm 2 . Cells showing a positive reaction from the average of 5000 cells were counted in the selected area. However, all sections were scanned at 200 final magnification for counting positively reacted cells as the very limited number of cells exhibited positive reaction for the c kit (CD117) and CD45 antibodies.
PCR Array
Total RNA was isolated from heart tissue samples using commercial RNA isolation kit (Cat No./ID: 74106, RNeasy Mini Kit, QIAGEN) including on-column DNAse treatment to remove genomic DNA. The concentration and purity of total RNA samples were determined using a drop plate reader (Multiskan™ GO, Microplate Spectrophotometer, THERMO) by measuring their absorbance values at 260 and 280 nm and calculating A260/A280 ratio. cDNA synthesis was performed using a commercial cDNA synthesis kit (#K1682, Maxima H Minus First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit with dsDNase, THERMO SCIENTIFIC). The synthesized and quantified cDNA samples were used on the Real-Time RT 2 Profiler PCR Array (Cat No./ID: PARN-024Z, QIAGEN) in combination with LightCycler ® 480 SYBR Green I Master Kit (Cat No./ID: 04707516001, ROCHE) to analyze the panel of 84 angiogenesis genes (Table 4 ). CT values were exported to an Excel file to create a table of CT values. This table was then uploaded onto the data analysis web portal http://www.qiagen.com/geneglobe . Samples were assigned to controls and test groups. CT values were normalized based on an automatic selection from the full panel of reference genes. This software utilizes ΔΔ CT-based fold change calculations and the Student’s t test to calculate two-tail, equal variance p values. The fold changes were determined using the Eq. 2 −ΔΔCt . If fold change was greater than 1, the result was evaluated as fold upregulation. If fold change was less than 1, the negative inverse of the result was considered as fold downregulation. Table 4 Genes used in the PCR array analysis Gene Gene symbol Refseq V-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 1 Akt1 NM_033230 Angiogenin, ribonuclease, RNase A family, 5 Ang NM_001012359 Angiopoietin 1 Angpt1 NM_053546 Angiopoietin 2 Angpt2 NM_134454 Alanyl (membrane) aminopeptidase Anpep NM_031012 Brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor 1 Bai1 NM_001170597 Chemokine (C–C motif) ligand 2 Ccl2 NM_031530 Cadherin 5 Cdh5 NM_001107407 Collagen, type XVIII, alpha 1 Col18a1 NM_053489 Collagen, type IV, alpha 3 Col4a3 NM_001135759 Connective tissue growth factor Ctgf NM_022266 Chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 (melanoma growth stimulating activity, alpha) Cxcl1 NM_030845 Chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 2 Cxcl2 NM_053647 Chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 9 Cxcl9 NM_145672 Endothelin 1 Edn1 NM_012548 Ephrin A1 Efna1 NM_053599 Epidermal growth factor Egf NM_012842 Endoglin Eng NM_001010968 Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 Epas1 NM_023090 V-erb-b2 erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2, neuro/glioblastoma-derived oncogene homolog (avian) Erbb2 NM_017003 Coagulation factor II (thrombin) F2 NM_022924 Coagulation factor III (thromboplastin, tissue factor) F3 NM_013057 Fibroblast growth factor 1 Fgf1 NM_012846 Fibroblast growth factor 2 Fgf2 NM_019305 Fibroblast growth factor 6 Fgf6 NM_131908 Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 Fgfr3 NM_053429 C-fos-induced growth factor Figf NM_031761 Fms-related tyrosine kinase 1 Flt1 NM_019306 Fibronectin 1 Fn1 NM_019143 Hepatocyte growth factor Hgf NM_017017 Hypoxia-inducible factor 1, alpha subunit (basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor) Hif1a NM_024359 Inhibitor of DNA binding 1 Id1 NM_012797 Interferon-alpha 1 Ifna1 NM_001014786 Interferon beta 1, fibroblast Ifnb1 NM_019127 Interferon gamma Ifng NM_138880 Insulin-like growth factor 1 Igf1 NM_178866 Interleukin 1 beta Il1b NM_031512 Interleukin 6 Il6 NM_012589 Integrin, alpha 5 (fibronectin receptor, alpha polypeptide) Itga5 NM_001108118 Integrin, alpha V Itgav NM_001106549 Integrin, beta 3 Itgb3 NM_153720 Jagged 1 Jag1 NM_019147 Kinase insert domain receptor Kdr NM_013062 Leukocyte cell-derived chemotaxin 1 Lect1 NM_030854 Leptin Lep NM_013076 Mitogen-activated protein kinase 14 Mapk14 NM_031020 Midkine Mdk NM_030859 Matrix metallopeptidase 14 (membrane-inserted) Mmp14 NM_031056 Matrix metallopeptidase 19 Mmp19 NM_001107159 Matrix metallopeptidase 2 Mmp2 NM_031054 Matrix metallopeptidase 3 Mmp3 NM_133523 Matrix metallopeptidase 9 Mmp9 NM_031055 Nitric oxide synthase 3, endothelial cell Nos3 NM_021838 Neuropilin 1 Nrp1 NM_145098 Neuropilin 2 Nrp2 NM_030869 Platelet-derived growth factor alpha polypeptide Pdgfa NM_012801 Platelet-derived growth factor beta polypeptide (simian sarcoma viral (v-sis) oncogene homolog) Pdgfb NM_031524 Platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 Pecam1 NM_031591 Placental growth factor Pgf NM_053595 Plasminogen activator, urokinase Plau NM_013085 Plasminogen Plg NM_053491 Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 1 Ptgs1 NM_017043 PTK2 protein tyrosine kinase 2 Ptk2 NM_013081 Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 S1pr1 NM_017301 Serpin peptidase inhibitor, clade B (ovalbumin), member 5 Serpinb5 NM_057108 Serpin peptidase inhibitor, clade E (nexin, plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1), member 1 Serpine1 NM_012620 Serpin peptidase inhibitor, clade F (alpha-2 antiplasmin, pigment epithelium-derived factor), member 1 Serpinf1 NM_177927 Sphingosine kinase 1 Sphk1 NM_133386 TEK tyrosine kinase, endothelial Tek NM_001105737 Transforming growth factor alpha Tgfa NM_012671 Transforming growth factor, beta 1 Tgfb1 NM_021578 Transforming growth factor, beta 2 Tgfb2 NM_031131 Transforming growth factor, beta 3 Tgfb3 NM_013174 Transforming growth factor, beta receptor 1 Tgfbr1 NM_012775 Thrombospondin 1 Thbs1 NM_001013062 Tyrosine kinase with immunoglobulin-like and EGF-like domains 1 Tie1 NM_053545 TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor 1 Timp1 NM_053819 TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor 2 Timp2 NM_021989 TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor 3 Timp3 NM_012886 Tumor necrosis factor (TNF superfamily, member 2) Tnf NM_012675 Thymidine phosphorylase Tymp NM_001012122 Vascular endothelial growth factor A Vegfa NM_031836 Vascular endothelial growth factor B Vegfb NM_053549 Vascular endothelial growth factor C Vegfc NM_053653 Actin, beta Actb NM_031144 Beta-2 microglobulin B2m NM_012512 Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase 1 Hprt1 NM_012583 Lactate dehydrogenase A Ldha NM_017025 Ribosomal protein, large, P1 Rplp1 NM_001007604 Rat genomic DNA contamination RGDC U26919
Real-Time (RT)-PCR
The synthesized cDNA samples, produced using a commercial kit (#K1682, Maxima H Minus First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit with dsDNase, THERMO SCIENTIFIC), were quantified, and 200 ng cDNA of each heart tissue sample was used to amplify genes of which details are given in Table 5 . LightCycler ® 480 SYBR Green I Master Kit (Cat No./ID: 04707516001, ROCHE) was used, and all PCRs were normalized to beta-actin. Crossing point ( Cp ) values of the amplified genes were used to determine relative expressions of genes with respect to beta-actin using the ΔΔCp method. Table 5 Details of primers used in real-time PCR analysis Gene Base sequence (5′→3′) Reference ANGPT-2 F: AAAGAGTACAAAGAGGGCTTC [ ] R: TCCAGTAGTACCACTTGATAC β-Actin F: CGTTGACATCCGTAAAGACC [ ] R: GATAGAGCCACCAATCCACA cTnI F: AAAAAGTCTAAGATCTCCGCCTCCA [ ] R: GGTTTTCCTTCTCAATGTCCTCCTT cTnT F: CGTAGAAGAGGTTGGTCCTGATGAA [ ] R: TGTACCCTCCAAAGTGCATCATGTT Periostin F: ACAAGCCAACAAAAGGGTTCA [ ] R: ACGGCCTTCTCTTGATCGC TGF-β1 F: GGACTACTACGCCAAAGAAG [ ] R: TCAAAAGACAGCCACTCAGG VEGF-A F: GCACATAGGAGAGATGAGCTTCC [ ] R: CACCGCCTTGGCTTGTCACAT CD45 F: CAACGAAATGGCCCTGCTAAG [ ] R: CATTGACTTTGCCTGGACGAG cKit (CD117) F: GCCACGTAATAATTCCAAACAGC GenBank AA818381.1 R: AGAATAGCTGTTAACTGTGGACG Cyclin D1 F: CTGCTGTGTCCATGGTGATG Ref. Sequence: NM_171992.4 R: CCATGCTGGTCACATGTCTG Cyclin D2 F: CTGCTAGCCCCTTCTCTCTC Ref. Sequence: NM_022267.1
Statistical Analysis
All the data were expressed as mean ± SEM. Assessment of the results was performed by using one-way ANOVA. Differences between groups were demonstrated by Kruskal–Wallis test. Data that were not normally distributed are presented as median (25–75% range), and group medians were compared with the Mann–Whitney rank sum test and one-sample t tests. For all the statistical analysis, GraphPad Prism 5 statistical software (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA) was used. Statistical significance was determined as p value below 0.05.
Results
Myocardial damage following periostin application was significantly higher in the periostin-applied treatment Group 4 compared to only ISO applied to Group 3 on day 1. However, this is reversed on day 7 and day 28 (Figs. 1 a, 2 a–e). There was not any difference between left and right ventricles in terms of cardiomyocyte degeneration and necrosis. The amount of collagen synthesis did not differ significantly between these two groups throughout the experiment (Figs. 1 b, 2 f–g). Fig. 1 Semiquantitative and quantitative analysis results of histopathological and immunohistochemical stainings in ISO- and recombinant murine periostin peptide-administered rat hearts. * Adjacent column groups with different letters indicate statistically significant difference ( P < 0.05). ** Experimental groups: Group 1: saline-applied control group; Group 2: only recombinant murine periostin peptide-administered group (recombinant periostin control group); Group 3: only ISO-administered group (acute myocard degeneration group); Group 4: recombinant murine periostin peptide- and ISO-applied treatment group (Color figure online) Fig. 2 Histopathological analysis and immunohistochemical staining results for the TGF-β1, FGF-2, VEGF-A, ANGPT-2, and periostin in the ISO- and periostin-administered rat hearts. a Normal heart muscle cells (cardiomyocytes) with eccentrically placed nuclei are forming bundles separated by vascularized endomysium. Saline-applied control group, Group 1, day 7. HE. Bar = 30 µm. b Diffuse degeneration, necrosis in the cardiomyocytes (arrow). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. HE. Bar = 150 µm. c Light stained area formed by developing fibroblasts (arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 28. HE. Bar = 30 µm. d Diffuse degeneration and necrosis in the cardiomyocytes (arrows). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 1. HE. Bar = 150 µm. e Fibrosis is present in only a small area (arrows). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 7. HE. Bar = 30 µm. f Limited and immature collagenesis in the heart parenchyma with diffuse degeneration and necrosis (arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. Masson’s Trichrome. Bar = 60 µm. g Newly developing, fine, light blue colored collagen bundles (arrows) in the heart parenchyma with fibrosis. ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 7. Masson’s Trichrome. Bar = 30 µm. h Mature, dark blue colored collagen fiber bundles (arrows) with increased thickness. ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 28. Masson’s Trichrome. Bar = 30 µm. i Diffuse, weak and moderate cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes. Some myocardial fiber bundles are negative (arrows). Only periostin-applied control group, Group 2, day 28. TGF-β1, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. j Myofibers, interstitial cells and mononuclear cells infiltrating necrotic myofibers in affected areas are showing the absence of specific immunoreactivity with a presence of single or small groups of myofibers reflecting decreased or faint immunostaining (arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. TGF-β1, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. k Diffuse and weak cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes. ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 28. TGF-β1, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. l Control heart with normal pattern of FGF-2 immunostaining revealing marked cytoplasmic reaction of cardiomyocytes. Some myocardial fiber bundles are negative (arrow). Saline-applied control group, Group 1, day 1. FGF-2, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. m Myofibers, interstitial cells, and mononuclear cells infiltrating necrotic myofibers in affected areas are showing the absence of specific immunoreactivity with the presence of single or small groups of myofibers reflecting decreased or faint immunostaining (arrow). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. FGF-2, IHC. Bar = 60 µm. n Restored FGF-2 immunostaining similar to control heart showing marked cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes. ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 28. FGF-2, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. o Diffuse cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes with densities ranging from weak to moderate. Only periostin-applied control group, Group 2, day 7. VEGF-A, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. p. Significant part of cardiomyocytes with normal histology is reflecting the absence of specific immunoreactivity. Only a small part of myofiber is positive (arrow). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 7. VEGF-A, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. q Restored VEGF-A immunostaining similar to control heart showing cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes. Some myocardial fiber bundles are negative (arrows). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 28. VEGF-A, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. r Control heart with the normal pattern of ANGPT-2 immunostaining revealing marked cytoplasmic reaction of cardiomyocytes. Some myocardial fiber bundles are negative (arrows). Saline-applied control group, Group 1, day 1. ANGPT-2, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. s Myofibers, interstitial cells, and mononuclear cells infiltrating necrotic myofibers in affected areas are showing the absence of specific immunoreactivity with the presence of single or small groups of myofibers reflecting decreased or faint immunostaining (arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 7. ANGPT-2, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. t Restored ANGPT-2 immunostaining similar to control heart showing cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes. ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 28. ANGPT-2, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. u Diffuse cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes with densities ranging from weak to intense. Media layer of small vessels is positive (arrows). Only Saline-applied control group, Group 1, day 1. Periostin, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. v Significant part of cardiomyocytes with normal histology is showing the absence of specific immunoreactivity. Only some myofibers are positive (short arrows). Small sized vessels are negative as well (long arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. Periostin, IHC. Bar = 60 µm. w Diffuse cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes with densities ranging from weak to moderate (short arrows). Developing fibroblasts revealing strong cytoplasmic reactivity (long arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. Periostin, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. x Diffuse and moderate cytoplasmic reaction of cardiomyocytes. The cytoplasmic reaction of some smooth muscle cells in a medium sized arteriole (arrows). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 7. Periostin, IHC. Bar = 30 µm (Color figure online)
TGF-β1, FGF-2, VEGF-A, ANGPT-2, Periostin, cTnI, cTnT, Cardiac Myosin Heavy Chain (cMhc), Alpha-Sarcomeric Actin (aSA) Immunolabeling
Immunohistochemical staining intensity and distribution did not differ significantly between left and right ventricles. In general, immunohistochemical staining indicated a tendency of increase for the TGF-β1 (Figs. 1 c, 2 i–k), FGF-2 (Figs. 1 d, 2 l–n), VEGF-A (Figs. 1 e, 2 o–q), ANGPT-2 (Figs. 1 f, 2 r–t), and periostin (Figs. 1 g, 2 u–x) expressions in the cardiomyocytes in periostin-treated rats (Group 4) compared to ISO-applied Group 3. However, the difference was statistically significant for only ANGPT-2 on days 1 and 28 ( P < 0.01, Fig. 1 f). Interestingly, periostin expression on fibroblasts was null in the hearts of the ISO-treated rats on the day 1, while its expression was pronounced in the ISO-applied periostin-treated Group 4. This is reversed on day 28 while periostin expression was still persisting on ISO-treated hearts, and it was null on ISO-applied periostin-treated Group 4. However, the difference was not statistically significant due to the presence of fully recovered hearts without any fibroblasts and hearts still in the recovery phase with the presence of periostin expression on their fibroblasts in Group 3 (Fig. 1 h).
Cardiomyocytes exhibited loss of normal immunoreactivity for the cTNI (Figs. 1 i, 3 a–c), cTnT (Figs. 1 j, 3 d–f), cMhc (Figs. 1 k, 3 g–i), and aSA (Figs. 1 l, 3 j–l) which was observed in areas where morphological damage was detectable by HE staining on ISO-treated hearts (Group 3). Loss of sarcoplasmic immunoreactivity was significant on day 1 as pale (negative) areas of sarcoplasm, with the loss of cross-striation on affected myofibers, and slight elevation on day 7 followed by mild elevation on the immunoreaction scores on day 28. On the other hand, loss of sarcoplasmic reactivity was limited to ISO-applied periostin-treated Group 4 compared to ISO-treated mice hearts (Group 3) on days 1 and 7 and restored to normal control values on day 28 (Fig. 1 i–l). Fig. 3 Immunohistochemical staining results for the cTNI, cTnT, cMhc, aSA, PCNA, Ki-67, H3P, and CDK2 in the ISO- and periostin-administered rat hearts. a Control heart with the normal pattern of cTnI immunostaining depicting densities ranging from moderate to marked in the cytoplasm of cardiomyocytes. A medium sized arteriole is cTnI negative (arrow). Only periostin-applied control group, Group 2, day 28. cTnI, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. b Myofibers, interstitial cells and mononuclear cells infiltrating necrotic myofibers in affected areas are depicting the absence of specific immunoreactivity with the presence of single or small groups of myofibers reflecting decreased or faint immunostaining (arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. cTnI, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. c Restored immunostaining in the cardiomyocyte cytoplasms. ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 28. cTnI, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. d Control heart with the normal pattern of cTnT immunostaining revealing densities ranging from moderate to strong in the cytoplasm of cardiomyocytes. A medium sized arteriole is cTnT negative (arrow). Saline-applied control group, Group 1, day 28. cTnT, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. e Myofibers, interstitial cells, and mononuclear cells infiltrating necrotic myofibers in affected areas are depicting the absence of specific immunoreactivity with the presence of single or small groups of myofibers reflecting decreased or faint immunostaining (arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. cTnT, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. f Restored immunostaining in the cardiomyocyte cytoplasms. ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 1. cTnT, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. g Moderate and diffuse cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes. One myocardial fiber bundle is negative (arrow). Only periostin-applied control group, Group 2, day 28. cMhc, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. h Myofibers, interstitial cells, and mononuclear cells infiltrating necrotic myofibers in affected areas are showing decreased or faint immunostaining. ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. cMhc, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. i Moderate and diffuse cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes. Few myocardial fiber bundles are negative (arrows). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 7. cMhc, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. j Moderate and diffuse cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes. Some myocardial fiber bundles are negative (arrows). Only periostin-applied control group, Group 2, day 28. aSA, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. k Myofibers, interstitial cells, and mononuclear cells infiltrating necrotic myofibers in affected areas are reflecting the absence of specific immunoreactivity with the presence of single or small groups of myofibers with decreased or faint immunostaining (arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. aSA, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. l Moderate and diffuse cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes. Some myocardial fiber bundles are negative (arrows). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 28. aSA, IHC. Bar = 60 µm. m Strong nuclear staining of endothelial cells present in the cardiac interstitium (arrows). Saline-applied control group, Group 1, day 7. PCNA, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. n Nuclear staining of endothelial cells present in the cardiac interstitium (short arrows). Some cardiomyocytes are showing nuclear staining (long arrows). A cell, probably a fibroblast/endothelial cell, in the telophase stage showing the cytoplasmic reaction (arrowhead). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. PCNA, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. o Cardiomyocytes are showing strong nuclear staining (long arrows). Some endothelial cells are showing nuclear staining (short arrows). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 1. PCNA, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. p Some endothelial cells are showing nuclear staining (arrows). Only periostin-applied control group, Group 2, day 7. Ki-67, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. q Strong nuclear staining of fibroblast/endothelial cells present in the cardiac interstitium (short arrows). A cell, probably a fibroblast/endothelial cell, in the early stage of mitosis (metaphase) with dense cytoplasmic immunoreaction (long arrow). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. Ki-67, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. r A cell, probably a fibroblast/endothelial cell, in the anaphase stage with dense nuclear immunoreaction (arrow). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. H3P, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. s Strong nuclear staining of fibroblast/endothelial cells present in the cardiac interstitium (short arrows). A cell, probably a fibroblast/endothelial cell, in the anaphase stage with dense nuclear immunoreaction (long arrow). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 1. H3P, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. t Some endothelial cells are showing nuclear staining (arrows). Only periostin-applied control group, Group 2, day 7. CDK2, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. u Diffuse and moderate cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes (arrows). Saline-applied control group, Group 1, day 28. CDK2, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. v Moderate cytoplasmic staining is associated with nuclear staining in some cardiomyocytes (short arrows). Other cardiomyocytes are showing the absence of specific immunoreactivity (long arrows). Some endothelial cells are showing nuclear staining (arrowheads). Saline-applied control group, Group 1, day 28. CDK2, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. w Weak cytoplasmic staining of remaining intact myofibers (arrows) while interstitial cells and other mononuclear inflammatory cells infiltrating in the affected areas are showing the absence of specific immunoreactivity. ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. CDK2, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. x Diffuse cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes with densities ranging from weak (arrow head) to moderate (short arrow). Some cardiomyocytes are showing the absence of specific immunoreactivity (long arrows). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 28. CDK2, IHC. Bar = 30 µm (Color figure online)
Immunolabeling for the Proliferation Index, Apoptosis, Mitosis, and DNA Synthesis
PCNA and Ki-67 expressions on the endothelial/fibroblastic cells were significantly upregulated in only periostin-applied control group (Group 2) on day 7 compared to the only saline-applied controls (Group 1). PCNA and Ki-67 expressions were likewise upregulated in recombinant murine periostin peptide and ISO-applied treatment group (Group 4) on day 7 compared to only ISO-administered group (Group 3). Interestingly, Ki-67 expression level decreased sharply on day 28 in periostin-applied treatment group (Group 4) compared to ISO group (Group 3) (Figs. 1 m, n, 3 m–q). Furthermore, H3P, used as an indicator of active mitosis, expression, in Group 4 compared with Group 3, was elevated, although the difference was not statistically significant on day 1 and then decreased to baseline levels on days 7 and 28 (Figs. 1 o, 3 r, s).
CDK2 activity was observed in either cardiomyocyte cytoplasm, cardiomyocyte nuclei or both cytoplasm and nuclei. Furthermore, endothelial/fibroblastic cells also exhibited strong reaction. Interestingly, nuclei of both endothelial/fibroblastic cells and cardiomyocytes were positive for the CDK2 only in the control groups, while those for experimental groups were negative. On the other hand, immunohistochemical analysis revealed that ISO (Group 3) significantly downregulated the expression of CDK2 activity in the cardiomyocyte cytoplasms on day 28 ( P < 0.05) while periostin application significantly improved CDK2 activity ( P < 0.05) compared to ISO group (Figs. 1 p, 3 t–x). Similarly, cyclin D1 activity was significantly upregulated in cardiomyocyte cytoplasms in the ISO-applied periostin-treated Group 4 compared to only ISO Group 3 on day 1 (Fig. 1 q) and for the endothelial fibroblastic cells the increase was significant on day 7 ( P < 0.01, Fig. 1 r). Their reactivities then decreased on day 28 (Fig. 4 a–d). Cyclin D2 immunoreactivity was also elevated in cardiomyocyte cytoplasms in the ISO-applied periostin-treated Group 4 compared to only ISO Group 3 on day 1 and 7 (Fig. 4 e, f). However, the difference between these groups was not statistically significant (Fig. 1 s). Cdc2 activity was downregulated in cardiomyocyte cytoplasms in both only ISO Group 3 and ISO-applied periostin-treated Group 4 on day 1. Their reactivates returned to normal levels on day 7 and then decreased on day 28 (Figs. 1 t, 4 g–i). Fig. 4 Immunohistochemical staining results for the Cyclin D1, Cyclin D2, CDC2, cKit (CD117), CD45, Bcl-2, and Bax in the ISO and periostin administered rat hearts. a Both interstitial endothelial cells (short arrow) and cardiomyocytes are showing nuclear staining (long arrow). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. Cyclin D1, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. b The apical cytoplasmic reaction of immature fibroblastic cells (arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 7. Cyclin D1, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. c Moderate cytoplasmic staining of some cardiomyocytes is associated with strong nuclear staining (arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 7. Cyclin D1, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. d Moderate nuclear staining of some cardiomyocytes (arrows). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 7. Cyclin D1, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. e Moderate cytoplasmic staining of cardiomyocytes (short arrows). Fibroblasts and mononuclear inflammatory cells in the affected areas are negative (long arrows). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 7. Cyclin D2, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. f Cardiomyocytes are showing diffuse cytoplasmic staining with densities ranging from weak to moderate (short arrows). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 1. Cyclin D2, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. g Cardiomyocytes are showing diffuse cytoplasmic staining with densities ranging from weak (arrow head) to moderate (short arrow). Capillary endothelial cells are reflecting marked cytoplasmic reaction (long arrows). Saline-applied control group, Group 1, day 28. Cdc2, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. h Myofibrils are showing weak cytoplasmic staining (short arrows). Reactive fibroblasts/endothelial cells are reflecting pronounced cytoplasmic staining (long arrows). A reactive fibroblast/endothelial cell in the metaphase stage is depicting cytoplasmic staining (arrow head). ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 1. Cdc2, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. i Cardiomyocytes are showing diffuse cytoplasmic staining with densities ranging from weak (short arrow) to moderate (arrow head). A small sized vessel is showing marked cytoplasmic reaction (long arrow). ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 7. Cdc2, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. j Mononuclear inflammatory cells with abundant cytoplasm are showing pronounced membranous staining. Myofibers, interstitial cells, and other mononuclear inflammatory cells infiltrating in affected areas are showing the absence of immunoreactivity. ISO-applied group, Group 3, day 7. cKit (CD117), IHC. Bar = 15 µm. k Pronounced membranous staining of mononuclear inflammatory cells with abundant cytoplasm in the vicinity of a venule. ISO- and periostin-applied group, Group 4, day 7. cKit (CD117), IHC. Bar = 15 µm. l Nuclear staining of interstitial endothelial cells (short arrows). Strong cytoplasmic staining associated with the membrane staining of cells is present in the media layer of a small venule (long arrows) and the cytoplasmic reaction of vascular media (arrowheads). Mononuclear inflammatory cells with abundant cytoplasm are showing pronounced membranous staining (white arrows). Saline-applied control group, Group 1, day 28. CD45, IHC. Bar = 15 µm. m Nuclear staining of both interstitial endothelial cells (short arrows) and cardiomyocytes (arrowheads). Cells located in the intimal and medial layers of a small arteriole are showing strong nuclear and cytoplasmic staining (long arrows). Only periostin-applied control group, Group 2, day 1. CD45, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. n Membranous staining of lymphocytes located in the cortical follicles from the tracheobronchial lymph node. Periostin-applied control group, Group 2, day 1. Bcl-2, IHC. Bar = 30 µm. o Nuclear apical cytoplasmic parts of lymphocytes located in the cortical follicles from tracheobronchial lymph node are showing dense immunoreactivity (short arrows). Some other lymphocytes or dendritic cells are showing membranous staining with densities ranging from weak to dense (long arrows). Only periostin-applied control group, Group 2, day 1. Bax, IHC. Bar = 15 µm (Color figure online)
Immunolabeling for the cKit (CD117), CD45, Bcl-2, and Bax
The number of cKit and CD45 positive mononuclear cells with high nucleus/cytoplasm ratio and pronounced membranous staining was rather low and distributed throughout the ventricular and atrial myocardium (Fig. 4 j–m). The number of cKit positive cells was at least threefold higher than that of pan-leukocyte marker CD45 positive mononuclear cells. cKit positive cells were found in small clusters around the small vessels, or they were found in the degenerated or necrotic areas intermixed with other mononuclear phagocytic cell infiltrate. The number of cKit positive mononuclear cells was higher in the ISO-applied periostin-treated Group 4 compared to only ISO Group 3 on days 7 and 28. However, the difference between these two groups was not statistically significant. Bcl-2 and Bax antibodies used for determination of sensitivity or resistance to apoptosis were negative in the control and experimental groups. However, lymphocytes located in the cortical follicles from tracheobronchial lymph nodes of the rats were positive for the both antibodies (Fig. 4 n, o).
PCR Array
To quantitatively examine multiple gene expression changes in the gene expression profile of ISO and ISO + periostin-treated rat hearts in a time course of 28 days, we used real-time RT 2 Profiler PCR Array (QIAGEN, Cat. No. PARN-024Z). Profiler PCR Array analysis was performed according to the manufacture’s protocol. A representative cluster histogram is shown in Fig. 5 . We selected genes whose expression were altered by at least twofold between experimental groups and healthy control rat hearts. The genes were analyzed according to the best characterized function of the protein that they encode. We found that recombinant murine periostin peptide administration upregulated several genes, including PLAU (urokinase-type plasminogen activator), THBS1 (thrombospondin 1), ANPEP (alanyl aminopeptidase), HGF (hepatocyte growth factor), HIF1A (hypoxia-inducible factor-1), HIF1A (hypoxia-inducible factor-1), SPHK1 (sphingosine kinase), EDN1 (endothelin 1), ACTB (beta-actin), TGFB2 (transforming growth factor, beta 2), CCL2 (chemokine (C–C motif) ligand 2) compared to only ISO-applied myocard degeneration group (Fig. 5 ). Thus, PCR array profiling provided a general insight into potential cellular mechanisms involved during the healing period following cardiac insult in rats. Fig. 5 Results of Rat Angiogenesis RT 2 Profiler PCR Array analysis. The clustergram indicates non-supervised hierarchical clustering of the entire dataset displaying a heatmap with dendrograms. Upregulated expressions (at least twofold) of angiogenesis genes in ISO-mediated cardiotoxicity are shown in the table. * The relative level of expression is shown as fold increase over control groups as determined by PCR array analysis. Expression levels were shown at time points. ** Experimental groups: Group 3: only ISO-administered group (myocard degeneration group); Group 4: recombinant murine periostin peptide and ISO-applied treatment group. NA: Gene expression level is not altered (Color figure online)
Real-Time PCR
We corroborated our findings by quantitative RT-PCR, which emphasizes the variability within each experimental group. Genes that were upregulated after ISO treatment (Group 3) compared with healthy control rats (Group 1), periostin control rats (Group 2), and periostin-treated rats (Group 4). ISO administration in Group 3 reduced VEGF-A, ANGPT-2, and cyclin D1 gene expressions compared to control Group 1 on day 1 (Fig. 6 ). However, periostin treatment stimulated the synthesis of cyclin D1 gene while it was not effective for the VEGF-A gene. Periostin treatment in Group 4 normalized the expression of ANGPT-2 gene similar to the levels of the untreated healthy control groups particularly on day 7 (Fig. 6 ). Genes that were upregulated after ISO treatment compared to healthy control rats include TGF-β1, CD45, cyclin D2, and periostin genes, in particular, day 1 and day 7. These genes were downregulated after periostin treatment in Group 4 on days 1, 7, and 28. cKit, cTNI, and cTnT genes, which were quiescent in the control Group 1, were upregulated in the ISO experimental group (Group 3), and synthesis was more prevalent in the periostin treatment group (Group 4) on days 1, 7, and 28. Fig. 6 Real-time PCR analysis results. * Adjacent column groups with different letters indicate statistically significant difference ( P < 0.05). ** Experimental groups: Group 1: only saline-applied control group; Group 2: only recombinant murine periostin peptide-administered group (recombinant periostin control group); Group 3: only ISO-administered group (acute myocard degeneration group); Group 4: recombinant murine periostin peptide and ISO-applied treatment group (Color figure online)
Discussion
Cardiomyocytes are classically known that they do not proliferate following maturation. However, in recent years, cardiomyocytes could be stimulated to gain proliferative activity through genetic reprogramming or by applying some transcription factors and cytokines [ ]. The possibility of myocardial regeneration is a new paradigm in cardiac biology. Utilizing external peptide factors to stimulate quiescent cardiomyocytes is advantageous, easy to apply, and exogenous cells or gene transfer is not required, thus excluding immunologic, ethical issues and their cost are rather low compared to other methods. Periostin is an extracellular protein, mainly involved in embryonic development of the heart, and plays a significant role in the healing process following cardiac damage [ , , , , ]. Periostin promotes cardiac wound healing by promoting cardiomyocytes into the cell cycle [ ].
In the present study, we investigated biologic markers of cellular proliferation. Both PCNA and Ki-67 are well-accepted indicators of cellular proliferation, and H3P is widely used for the precise assay of mitosis and thus serves as the ultimate marker of cell cycle reentry [ ]. Our study showed that ISO injury induced the number of proliferative cells. Interestingly, periostin stimulated Ki-67 and PCNA positive endothelial cells in the healthy control hearts. This activity possibly was a result of promoting the activity of periostin in the absence of injury, which has been demonstrated previously [ , , ]. Similarly, Ki-67 and PCNA activities elevated significantly on day 7 in the ISO + periostin group followed by a sharp decrease on day 28. In accordance with our findings, Zimmermann et al. [ ] observed increased number of PCNA-stained cells at 48 h after microembolization returning to normal in a week. They reported that more PCNA activity was associated with migrating monocytes and fibroblasts than with endothelial cells. Similarly, Yuasa et al. [ ] reported that cardiomyocytes were positive for the Ki-67 in the ischemic border zone in adult rats following myocardial infarction, indicating that cardiomyocytes are undergoing nuclear division with a sharp decrease after 5 days.
Mitosis and cytokinesis are the shortest phases of the cell cycle. Therefore, even fast proliferating cells like fetal cardiomyocytes in vivo show a relatively low percentage of H3P positive cells [ ]. This is confirmed by the nonexistence of H3P reactivity in the control animals, indicating the post-mitotic state of the adult rat heart. On the other hand, H3P expression was significantly higher in the ISO + periostin group on day 1. However, H3P signals decreased on day 7 in both groups and returning to quiescent state on day 28. Kuhn et al. [ ] showed that periostin induces mitosis in cardiomyocyte nuclei in the rats which are confirmed in the present study. However, the effective period of periostin is rather short and upon completion of healing process, H3P activity was returned to the negative state.
Myocardial cell cycle progression is controlled by the interplay of cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). The activity of CDKs is positively regulated by cyclins. The levels of D-cyclins are controlled largely by the extracellular environment, and mitogens can induce D-cyclins [ ]. When D-cyclins are induced, they associate with partner CDKs, CDK4, and CDK6 and allow entry of cells into the S phase [ ]. Tamamori-Adachi et al. [ ] revealed that cyclin D1 is induced by mitogenic stimuli, but its nuclear import is impaired in terminally differentiated cardiomyocytes. The expression of nuclear localizing signal (NLS)-tagged cyclin D1 (D1NLS) and CDK4 triggers the cell cycle, indicating that the impairment of nuclear expression of cyclin D1 is one of the barriers of the cell cycle in cardiomyocytes. Similarly, elevated cyclin D2 shows DNA synthesis and cell cycle activation indicating cardiac regeneration in transgenic mice [ , ]. In the present study, upregulation of cyclin D1, D2, and CDK2 in the ISO + periostin group on days 1 and 7 reveals that periostin drives cardiomyocytes into S phase, thus promoting proliferation of cardiomyocytes. Cyclin D2 overexpression on days 1 and 7 in the ISO + periostin group indicates that cardiac myocytes with elevated cyclin D2 expression are divided faster [ ]. Furthermore, cyclin D2 expression of cardiomyocytes resulted in regenerative growth in injured hearts [ ]. However, it was suggested that cyclin D2 was less efficient in activating cell cycle than cyclin D1 [ ]. Additionally, we demonstrated that cyclin D1 is expressed in the nuclei of fibroblastic cells and occasionally in the nuclei and cytoplasm of some cardiomyocytes, while Tamamori-Adachi et al. [ ] reported that in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes, cyclin D1 and CDK4 were present predominantly in the cytoplasm. Further, they pointed out that the nuclear import of the cyclin D1/CDK4 complex is prevented in post-mitotic cardiomyocytes. Yuasa et al. [ ] indicated that post-mitotic cardiomyocytes have a potential to proliferate providing that cyclin D1/CDK4 accumulates in the nucleus. The localization of cyclin D1 to the nucleus occurs as a balance between import and export of phospho-Thr 286-cyclin D1 through the transporter CRM1 into the cytosol [ ]. These findings indicate that cell cycle entry of quiescent cardiomyocytes could be enhanced by periostin activation.
The present study demonstrated that treatment with periostin is associated with an increase in angiogenesis factors in ISO-induced cardiomyocyte injury; this effect was mediated by increased expression of VEGF-A in cardiac tissues leading to angiogenesis. Deuse et al. [ ] reported that direct intramyocardial VEGF gene transfer improved cardiac function and induced angiogenesis in murine acute myocardial infarction. Similarly, an elevated VEGF level in the heart was associated with cardioprotection [ ]. In the present study on day 1, low level of ANGPT-2 elevated on day 7 and then decreased on day 28 in the only ISO-applied group, while ANGPT-2 activity did not alter in the ISO + periostin group as such control groups. ANGPT-2 has been implicated as a natural angiostatic factor [ ]. However, unaltered expression levels of the ANGPT-2 in the ISO + periostin group while its activity decreased in the only ISO-applied groups support the notion of ANGPT-2 playing an important role in angiogenesis. Our study revealed that administration of periostin might induce myocardial angiogenesis through the stimulation of angiogenic factors such as VEGF/ANGPT-2 in the setting of acute myocardial injury model.
It was previously shown that periostin gene is significantly elevated in rat hearts following MI [ ]. In the present study, recombinant murine periostin administration did not induce any adverse effects on healthy control hearts. However, some previous studies reported that liposomal periostin gene delivery caused dilated cardiomyopathy without hypertrophy [ ] while adenoviral gene delivery of periostin-like factor-induced hypertrophy [ ]. This discrepancy was attributed to cardiac fibroblasts expressing periostin and secreting it into the extracellular matrix [ ] and delivery by gene transfer causing significant intracellular retention [ ]. On the other hand, recent studies revealed 4 isoforms of periostin, Pn-1 to Pn-4, caused by alternative splicing at exon 17 or exon 21. Pn-1 is a full-length form, Pn-2 lacks exon 17, Pn-3 lacks exon 21, and Pn-4 lacks exons 17 and 21. It was stated that while Pn-2 and Pn-4 promote cell adhesion and angiogenesis in infarcted myocardium, Pn-1 has opposite effects [ ]. According to these recent findings, elevated Pn-1 is deleterious while Pn-2 and Pn-4 have beneficial effects on the myocardium. Opposing effects of periostin gene delivery observed in previous studies may be attributed to the differences in the function of isoforms stimulated. In our study, we did not observe dilated cardiomyopathy or hypertrophy which possibly due to the stimulating effect of recombinant murine periostin peptide on only Pn-2/4 but not Pn-1. However, it is a prerequisite to performing further genetical studies to confirm this hypothesis.
In the heart parenchyma, low number of infiltrating cKit positive cells points limited proliferative capacity of autogenous bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) [ ]. In the present study, periostin induced the number of cKit positive cells indicating that periostin mobilizes cKit positive BMSCs from bone marrow into the heart parenchyma with diffuse degeneration and necrosis during the healing period.
cTnI and cTnT immunoreaction scores on tissue sections correlated well with H&E lesion severity. However, cTnI and cTnT immunoreaction scores were elevated on days 7 and 28 with higher scores of ISO + periostin group. These findings show a temporal progression of pathologic changes in myocardial injury in the ISO + periostin group on day 1 albeit with an accelerated repair response to ISO administration on days 7 and 28. This is possibly due to the protective effect of periostin on the myocardium, preventing leakage of cTnI and cTnT from the myocardium into the blood stream.
Several genes were upregulated in the ISO + periostin group compared to only ISO-applied group. The Heat Map (Fig. 5 ) provides a visualization of the fold increases in expression among the selected groups for every gene in the array in the context of the array layout. The table in Fig. 5 provides the data of at least doubled fold increases and those upregulated genes belong to different families and biologic functions. The gene PLAU, which was upregulated in the early post-myocardial damage period in the ISO + periostin group, is involved in degradation of extracellular matrix components (ECM) including elastin and collagen and tissue remodeling either directly by proteolytic cleavage of extracellular matrix components, or indirectly through the activation of matrix metalloproteinases [ ]. In line with our findings, the previous study revealed that PLAU gene was increased at both transcriptional and protein levels during the early phase of post-myocardial infarction period in the rat myocardium [ ]. THBS1 gene encodes an adhesive glycoprotein that mediates cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix interactions, was significantly elevated in the early post-myocardial damage period in the ISO + periostin group compared to only ISO-applied hearts. THBS1 upregulation preserves the extracellular matrix and protects the heart from chamber dilation by exerting matrix-preserving actions [ ]. Similarly, HGF gene expression was increased in both early and late post-myocardial damage periods in the ISO + periostin group. HGF is cardioprotective toward acute cardiac ischemia/reperfusion injury, reduces infarct size, and increases cardiac performance through angiogenic and anti-apoptotic mechanisms [ ], indicating that periostin expands HGF activity throughout recovery period of the damaged myocardium. Other genes upregulated by periostin treatment were HIF1A and SPHK1 which mediate ischemic preconditioning and reduce myocardial ischemia in the rat heart [ , ], reflecting that periostin enhances angiogenesis in myocardial ischemia as evidenced by increased expression of VEGF-A in cardiac tissues leading to angiogenesis. EDN1 is involved in adverse myocardial remodeling in rats [ ]. Our results revealed that the myocardial levels of EDN1 elevated in both early and late myocardial damage periods in ISO + periostin group. Interestingly, periostin treatment has also induced EDN1 level only in the early period while its activity turned to normal in the late period. ACTB is the major indicator of myocardial cytoskeletal proteins and participates in many important cellular processes, including muscle contraction, cell motility, and division, organelle movement, the establishment, and maintenance of cell junction and cell shape [ ]. ACTB gene was significantly upregulated in the early stage of myocardial damage in the ISO + periostin group compared to only ISO-applied group. In the early stage of myocardial injury, the increased expression of cytoskeletal protein ACTB shows that the remodeling occurs in the myocardium. The increase in ACTB depicts compensation of the decrease in myocardial contractile function. Relative to the expression of controls, TGF-β2 and CCL2 gene expressions were upregulated following the myocardial injury at day 1 in the only ISO-applied group. The levels were significantly greater in the ISO + periostin group than they were in the ISO group. TGF-β2 functions as a mediator for the fibrosis and angiogenesis following myocardial infarction [ ]. These findings indicate that periostin treatment advances onset of cardiac fibrosis accompanied by early angiogenesis in the ISO-induced myocardial injury and then their levels returned to normal levels and protecting hearts from adverse effects of fibrosis. Acute myocardial injury results in an induction of cytokines like CCL2. The CCL2 displays chemotactic activity for monocytes [ ]. As part of the inflammatory response, CCL2 is produced by endothelial cells and various inflammatory cells but mainly by macrophages. Kakio et al. [ ] demonstrated a significant increase in CCL2 mRNA positive cells during reperfusion in rat myocardium. Schaper et al. [ ] pointed out the positive effects of CCL2 and monocyte stimulation in arteriogenesis which are beneficial only as an acute effect. Schwarz et al. [ ] showed that intramyocardial injection of CCL2 into the infarct border zone resulted in neo-angiogenesis and monocyte infiltration in chronically infarcted rat myocardium without any adverse effects.
Our findings suggest that exogenous periostin treatment ameliorates cardiac functions through several pathways; (1) periostin stimulates mitotic activity as shown by elevated Ki-67, PCNA, and H3P levels on the fibroblastic/endothelial cells; (2) periostin induces cyclin D1, cyclin D2, CDK2 gene, and protein expressions, indicating that periostin drives cardiomyocytes into S and M phases thus promoting proliferation of cardiomyocytes; (3) periostin is associated with elevated angiogenesis factors; this effect was reflected by upregulated immunohistochemical expressions of VEGF-A and genes (THBS1, ANPEP, HGF, TGFB2) involved in angiogenesis while protecting heart from ischemia/reperfusion injury (HGF, HIF1A, SPHK1); (4) periostin induces collagen degradation and tissue remodeling (PLAU) which is important for the healing process following myocardial damage; (5) periostin reduces cardiac fibrosis (EDN1) during the healing period; (6) periostin regulates cell growth and proliferation (TGFB2) while maintaining cell shape and cellular muscle contractions (ACTB) and functions as a chemoattractant factor (CCL2) at the beginning of myocardial damage.
In conclusion, periostin peptide is a promising drug for the induction of regeneration of damaged myocardium. This may involve several growth factors including VEGF, THBS1, ANPEP, and HGF which are capable of generating new vessels in an ischemic milieu and increase myocardial revascularization, potentially improving ventricular function by restoring blood flow to the viable myocardium.