Introduction
Heavy metals, such as lead (Pb), induce adverse effects when chronically accumulated in the human body. Disorders of the gastrointestinal, renal, hepatic, haematologic and immunologic systems, as well as changes in the central nervous system (CNS) and cardiovascular systems, have been reported [ , , ]. However, the blood concentration levels of lead that are considered safe from such effects are still controversial. Concentrations greater than or equal to 30 µg/dL are considered elevated in adults, and the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry recommends a maximum limit of 60 μg/dL for occupationally exposed adults [ ]. However, increases in blood pressure (BP) have been reported in individuals with lead blood concentrations of approximately 32–53 µg/dL [ , ].
We recently demonstrated that chronic lead acetate administration in rats, leading to blood concentrations as low as 10–20 µg/dL, elevates BP and increases vascular reactivity [ , , ]. These results reinforce the idea of hazardous lead effects even at low levels. The elevation of BP induced by lead exposure is normally associated with changes in vascular reactivity with increased peripheral resistance [ , , ], stimulation of the renin–angiotensin system [ ] and nephropathy [ , ].
The nervous system is reported to be one of the systems that is most susceptible to chronic lead exposure in adults and children, exhibiting disorders such as encephalopathy, cognitive deficit and peripheral neuropathy [ , , ]. Despite many reports about the consequences of lead toxicity in the nervous system, attention has been focused on the cognitive, behavioural and somatic functions. In this regard, there is little information about the impact on the autonomic nervous system (ANS), despite its relevance to cardiovascular control. Several clinical studies have demonstrated decreased heart rate variability (HRV) in lead-exposed humans [ ], which is associated with heart failure and sudden death [ ]. In a rat model of long-term lead ingestion, Carmignani et al. [ ] demonstrated that lead blood levels of approximately 23 μg/dL appeared to increase sympathetic nervous system activity through central mechanisms, together with increased plasma concentrations of noradrenaline and adrenaline. The authors suggested that this sympathetic hyperactivity may contribute to hypertension as a result of increased cardiac inotropism and peripheral resistance [ ]. In fact, autonomic dysfunction has been associated with an increased risk of several cardiovascular diseases, such as arrhythmia, heart failure and hypertension [ , , ].
Thus, the present study was conducted to investigate the effect of chronic, controlled lead exposure on the autonomic control of the cardiovascular system in rats by specifically assessing heart rate variability, cardiovascular autonomic reflexes and the sympathovagal balance on the heart.
Materials and Methods
Animal Model of Chronic Lead Exposure
Adult male Wistar rats (180–200 g) were used in this study. The care and use of animals were in accordance with the Brazilian Guidelines for the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific and Educational Purposes and were approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee on Animal Use (CEUA-UFES 0101/11). All rats had free access to water and were fed rat chow ad libitum. A total of 40 rats were randomly distributed in two groups: 19 lead (Pb—as lead acetate, first dose of 4 µg/100 g body weight and subsequent doses of 0.05 µg/100 g/day to cover daily urinary excretion, given intramuscularly for 30 days) and 21 control (Ct—saline injections at the same volume and regimen for lead exposure). The rat blood volume was calculated according to Lee and Blaufox [ ]. This exposure protocol was proven to increase BP in rats [ , ]. Lead acetate, Pb(CH 3 COO) 2 , was purchased from Sigma Chemical Co., USA.
Hemodynamic Studies on the Conscious Rat
At the 29th day of exposure, the animals were anaesthetised with ketamine (50 mg/kg i.p., Rhobifarma Farm, Hortolandia, BRA) and xylazine (10 mg/kg i.p., König Lab, Avellaneda, ARG), and a fluid-filled catheter (PE-50 polyethylene) with degassed saline heparinised solution was placed into the abdominal aorta via the femoral artery. A femoral venous cannula was implanted for drug infusion, and both arterial and venous cannulas were exteriorised at the interscapular region and clipped. The surgical incision sites were closed by sutures, and after the surgery, animals were warmed and kept in individual cages for recovery.
Blood Pressure Recordings
Twenty-four hours later, the arterial cannula was connected to an extensor PE-50 tube filled with degassed saline solution and attached to a low-volume pressure transducer (TSD 104A, Biopac Systems Inc., Santa Barbara, USA). The transducer was connected to an integrated data acquisition system (MP 30, Biopac Systems Inc., Santa Barbara, USA), and the pressure pulses were registered at a sampling rate of 1 kHz for at least 30 min, allowing an analysis of the systolic arterial pressure (SAP), diastolic arterial pressure (DAP), mean arterial pressure (MAP) and pulse interval (PI). Heart rate was measured from the pulse interval using the following equation: HR (in beats per min) = 60/PI (in seconds). Hemodynamic parameters were assessed during a recording session of 60 min in total for each animal.
Cardiovascular Variability
Analysis of SAP and PI variability in 10-min recordings was performed as previously described [ ] using time- and frequency-domain parameters that were calculated using a computer software program (CardioSeries, version 1.2— http://sites.google.com/site/cardioseries ). The total variance and standard deviation were calculated for PI and SAP using the time domain, as well as the root mean square of the differences of successive interbeat intervals (RMSSD). The RMSSD is the most important time-domain measure used to estimate the vagal regulatory activity on the HR. For the frequency-domain analysis, the beat-to-beat series were converted to data points using an interpolation rate of 10 Hz and half-overlapping for sequential data sets containing 512 data points. Nonstationary or aberrant segments were identified visually and were not used for the calculation of the spectral analysis. The spectrum was computed using a direct fast Fourier transformation (FFT) algorithm and was integrated into the very low-frequency band (VLF: 0–0.2 Hz), low-frequency band (LF: 0.2–0.75 Hz) and high-frequency band (HF: 0.75–3 Hz). The results are presented in absolute and normalised powers of the bands. When the analysis included normalised units, VLF was excluded and the LF/HF ratio was calculated, thus characterising the sympathovagal balance.
Cardiovascular Autonomic Reflexes
Evoked Baroreflex Sensitivity
After a hemodynamic recording performed at rest, the baroreflex was tested by infusing phenylephrine and sodium nitroprusside (both from Sigma Chemical Company, St. Louis, MO, USA) and was assessed as the mean ratio of reflex bradycardia to phenylephrine-induced hypertension, as well as the mean ratio of reflex tachycardia to nitroprusside-induced hypotension. Doses were adjusted (0.3–35 µg/kg for phenylephrine and 0.01–2 µg/kg for nitroprusside) to raise and decrease the BP to a range that was 5–50 mmHg greater than baseline pressure in both groups.
Spontaneous Baroreflex Sensitivity
The spontaneous baroreflex was evaluated using the sequence method [ ], which is based on the relationships between the parallel fluctuations in SAP and PI that occur spontaneously. The same hemodynamic recordings and computer software used for cardiovascular variability were used to evaluate the baroreflex. Baroreflex sequences were defined as the ramps detected in the beat-to-beat series from at least four arterial pulses when the SAP changes were directly correlated with PI changes and showed a linear correlation coefficient >0.8. Finally, spontaneous baroreflex sensitivity or gain was considered the slope of the linear regression calculated for the upward and downward ramps.
Bezold–Jarisch Cardiopulmonary Reflex
The Bezold–Jarisch reflex was evoked by random microinjections (1.5, 3; 6; 12 and 24 mg/kg i.v.) of the 5-hydroxytryptamine-3 (5-HT3) receptor agonist phenylbiguanide (PBG, Sigma Chemical Co., St Louis, USA). This reflex was identified by a triad of cardiorespiratory responses (apnoea, bradycardia and hypotension); however, it was evaluated here only by the cardiovascular effects, such as the dose-dependent reduction in HR and MAP.
Sympathovagal Tone and Heart Rate
In another series of experiments, rats were catheterised as described above and received methylatropine (1 mg/kg i.v., Sigma Chemical Co., St Louis, USA) followed by atenolol (5 mg/kg i.v., Sigma Chemical Co., St Louis, USA) 15 min later. Changes in HR due to selective pharmacological blockade of the cardiac autonomic muscarinic cholinergic and β-adrenergic receptors were recorded. Twenty-four hours later, the same rats were submitted to a protocol in which autonomic blockers were given in the reverse order. The magnitude of HR changes elicited with methylatropine in the protocol including the atenolol/methylatropine sequence was considered vagal tone, whereas the response to atenolol in the protocol of the methylatropine/atenolol sequence was considered sympathetic tone. HR attained after double blockade was considered the intrinsic HR, with double blockade of the autonomic pathways confirmed by blunted HR responses to single injections of phenylephrine and sodium nitroprusside.
Statistical Methods
Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM. For inferential statistics, Student’s t test or two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used when appropriate, and differences at P < 0.05 were considered significant. Statistical analysis and graphical construction were performed using GraphPad Prism version 6.00 for Windows (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, California, USA).
Results
Lead treatment did not change the body weight gain in the controls or treated rats (data not shown). As shown in Table 1 , chronic exposure to lead increased SAP, MAP and DAP without significantly altering the HR or PI. Table 1 Effects of chronic lead acetate on the arterial hemodynamics and variability of systolic arterial pressure and pulse interval over time domain in conscious rats Control Lead P value Systolic arterial pressure (mmHg) 116.2 ± 2.8 129 ± 2.1 0.0049 Mean arterial pressure (mmHg) 95.2 ± 1.7 107 ± 3.3 0.0028 Diastolic arterial pressure (mmHg) 81.3 ± 1.8 96 ± 3.5 0.0002 Pulse interval (ms) 163.5 ± 4.9 154.1 ± 2.9 0.1243 Systolic arterial pressure variability Standard deviation (mmHg) 3.51 ± 0.21 4.21 ± 0.14 0.0166 Variance (mmHg 2 ) 12.8 ± 1.4 18.2 ± 1.3 0.0125 Pulse interval variability Standard deviation (ms) 5.19 ± 0.42 3.63 ± 0.66 0.0270 Variance (ms 2 ) 30.0 ± 4.3 11.5 ± 3.8 0.0092 RMSSD (ms) 4.92 ± 0.45 3.34 ± 0.56 0.0249 RMSSD root mean square of the successive differences Values are presented as the mean ± EPM. P values were obtained by two-sided unpaired Student’s t test. P values <0.05 were considered significant
To evaluate the effects of lead on the cardiovascular reflexes, the baroreflex and cardiopulmonary reflex were assessed (Figs. 1 , 2 ). The baroreflex sensitivity, which was measured by the slope of the linear regression and established between the changes in BP and HR, was lower in the Pb group. The reflex bradycardia elicited by the phenylephrine-induced hypertension and the reflex tachycardia elicited by the nitroprusside-induce hypotension were markedly attenuated in lead-exposed rats (Fig. 1 b, c). The same difference was detected in the gain of the baroreflex as measured by the sequence analysis of parallel fluctuations in SAP and PI that occurred spontaneously. As demonstrated in Fig. 1 d, e, both the upper and lower ramps were softened in the Pb group. Fig. 1 Effects of chronic lead exposure on the baroreflex of conscious rats. In a the typical registry. In b lines represent baroreflex responses evoked by intravenous injections of phenylephrine and nitroprusside as the averaged linear regressions between changes in BP and pulse interval. The changes in the left-lower quadrant represent reflex tachycardia in response to nitroprusside-induced hypotension, and lines in the right-upper quadrant represent reflex bradycardia in response to phenylephrine-induced hypertension. In c the gain of the evoked baroreflex is represented as the slopes of linear regressions. d Original records representative of one control rat and one lead-injected rat showing the relationships between spontaneous fluctuations of pulse interval (PI) and systolic blood pressure (SBP). Solid lines represent upper ramps (reflex bradycardia in response to hypertension), and dotted lines represent down ramps (reflex tachycardia in response to hypotension). e The gain of the spontaneous baroreflex represented as the slopes of the linear regressions. Bars represent mean ± SEM. * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01 and *** P < 0.001 versus the respective control group. Except for comparisons between down ramps in the spontaneous baroreflex (nonparametric Mann–Whitney test), all comparisons were performed using an unpaired Student’s t test Fig. 2 Effects of chronic lead exposure on the Bezold–Jarisch cardiopulmonary reflex in conscious rats. Dose–response curves showing reflex changes in a mean arterial pressure (MAP) and in b heart rate (HR) in response to the 5-HT3 receptor agonist phenylbiguanide (PBG, 1.5, 3, 6, 12 and 24 mg/kg, in bolus intravenous injections). Symbols represent mean ± SEM
The cardiopulmonary Bezold–Jarish reflex was also tested (Fig. 2 ). Intravenous injection of a 5-HT3 agonist induced dose-dependent reflex-mediated reductions in MAP (Fig. 2 a) and HR (Fig. 2 b). The pattern of the Bezold–Jarisch reflex was not significantly attenuated in rats exposed to lead when compared to controls. Although the bradycardic response in the Pb group was apparently attenuated, no significant difference was identified, even when evaluated as the percentage change from the baseline HR (data not shown).
Sympathovagal Tone on the Heart Rate
To elucidate whether these changes were dependent on alterations in the autonomic modulation of the cardiovascular system, we investigated the HRV. The time-domain variability of SAP and PI during baseline recordings is summarised in Table 1 . Both parameters of SAP variability (standard deviation and variance) were increased in the Pb group. Conversely, although the mean of the PI was not significantly different when compared to controls, the lead-exposed rats showed a reduction in the PI variability, as measured by the standard deviation and variance. Additionally, RMSSD was reduced in the Pb group when compared to the Ct group. When analysing the spectra of PI oscillations in the frequency domain of each group, the power of the LF component was increased after lead exposure, whereas HF decreased. As a result, there is an elevation in the LF/HF ratio in the Pb group (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Effects of chronic lead exposure on the heart rate variability (HRV) of conscious rats. Representative power spectral densities ( a ), HRV parameters over the frequency domain are represented by b absolute c and d normalised powers of low-frequency (LH) and high-frequency (HF) bands of the spectra. c The LF/HF ratio. Bars represent mean ± SEM.* P < 0.05, and *** P < 0.001 versus the respective control group. All comparisons were performed using an unpaired Student’s t test
To further assess the effects of chronic lead exposure on the sympathovagal tone of the heart, we performed pharmacological blockades of the ANS by using methylatropine and atenolol. As shown in Fig. 4 , although basal HR was similar between groups, the magnitude of changes in HR elicited by methylatropine and atenolol in conscious rats exhibited significant differences. The change in HR produced by cardiac vagal tone blockade with methylatropine was significantly reduced in the Pb group when compared to the Ct group (∆HR 60 ± 5 vs 102 ± 8 bpm). Conversely, the reduction in HR elicited by the cardiac sympathetic tone block with atenolol was increased (∆HR 56 ± 6 vs 41 ± 5 bpm). In addition, the intrinsic HR was significantly reduced after lead exposure although there was no change in the basal HR. Fig. 4 Effects of chronic lead exposition on the cardiac sympathetic and vagal tones in conscious rats. In a changes in heart rate (∆HR) in the control and lead groups are presented. Bars show the respective HR responses to pharmacological blockade of the β-adrenergic receptors with atenolol (cardiac sympathetic tone, bottom shifted bars ) or the muscarinic receptors with methylatropine (cardiac vagal tone, upper shifted bars ). In b the basal and intrinsic HR from both experimental groups assessed before and after double blockade of the autonomic pathways, respectively. Bars and symbols represent mean ± SEM. * P < 0.05 when compared to the same parameter versus control group. All comparisons were performed using an unpaired Student’s t test
Discussion
The main finding of the present study shows that rats chronically exposed to lead using a well-controlled model of low-level exposure showed a decreased baroreflex sensitivity and sympathovagal imbalance on the control of HR. Furthermore, BP also increased, which confirms our previous reports that low to moderate levels of lead intoxication are related to a slight elevation of BP in rats [ , ] and population studies showing a relationship between blood lead levels and hypertension [ , ].
As shown in Table 1 , lead exposure increased BP. According to Silveira et al. [ ], this BP increase occurs in the first week of treatment keeping this increase in the following 3 weeks [ ]. However, what is seen is not classified as hypertension, but a significant increase in BP. As previously reported, the involvement of sympathetic nervous system and circulating catecholamines plays a role in lead-induced hypertension [ , ].
Both BP and HR are continuously regulated by autonomic reflexes that result from detection of arterial pressure, pH, arterial oxygen pressure, vascular wall stress and several other signals that are ultimately integrated in the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) (for review, see , ). It was previously reported that these reflexes might be affected in several conditions, including hypertension, heart failure and diabetes [ , , ]. Moreover, toxic accumulation of essential elements, such as iron [ ], or trace elements, such as mercury [ ], cadmium [ ] and lead [ ], is also associated to baroreflex changes. Nevertheless, we describe a negative impact on the autonomic reflexes controlling cardiovascular function, as well as the autonomic control of HR in the rat, even with a low-dose lead exposure. This autonomic dysfunction, for example, could contribute to lead-induced hypertension.
Of the probable mechanisms involved in the genesis and maintenance of BP elevations induced by lead exposure, numerous studies point to increased peripheral vascular resistance due to endothelial [ , , ] and vascular smooth muscle dysfunction [ ], increased endothelin [ ], oxidative stress [ , , , ] and reduced NO bioavailability [ , ]. Moreover, activation of the renin–angiotensin system, which is closely associated with ANS activation, would also be present in acute and chronic lead toxicities [ , ].
In the 1980s, the Boscolo and Carmignani research group originally proposed that the hypertensive effect induced by severe lead intoxication could be explained by central sympathetic hyperactivity, baroreflex hyposensitivity and parasympathetic tone reduction [ , , ]. The present work provides strong evidence that an autonomic imbalance, characterised by increased sympathetic tone added to reduce vagal tone, is already present in this model of low-level lead exposure in the rat. As the autonomic reflexes play a fine and moment-to-moment role in the control of cardiovascular functions, we may speculate that these targets could be among the first to be affected during exposure to low doses of lead.
Despite the wide use of phenylephrine and nitroprusside injections in baroreflex studies, the analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of BP and HR has been suggested to be more sensitive than the severe pressure changes induced by these drugs. For over a decade, the use of nitroprusside has been questioned because it also produces venodilation, which could interfere with the activity of cardiopulmonary receptors by decreasing the central venous pressure and preload [ ], as well as suggesting that NO, which is released by nitrovasodilators, may change baroreceptor activity [ ] and cardiac sympathetic neurotransmission [ ]. Thus, we also performed an analysis of the spontaneous baroreflex through parallel fluctuations in PB and HR. To the best of our knowledge, our results demonstrated for the first time that by using evoked and spontaneous baroreflex assessments, both reflex bradycardia and tachycardia are decreased by low-level lead exposure.
Interestingly, despite altered baroreflex gain, the cardiopulmonary reflex was not different between the groups. Thus, we might speculate that the ANS could indeed be changed by lead exposure, but not enough to significantly alter the dynamics of cardiac pressure and filling. About the exact mechanism by which the lead promotes such actions is unclear, the literature indicates that some autonomic changes are centrally mediated [ , ]. Additionally, it is already known that the lower sensitivity of the baroreflex promoted by angiotensin II plays an important role in the pathophysiology of hypertension, mainly by central actions, characterised by vasopressin release, sympathetic activation and baroreflex inhibition [ , ]. In this regard, previous studies by our research group and others [ , , ] showed evidence that peripheral renin–angiotensin system activity is increased by lead.
Because our findings suggested that lead increased the sympathetic tone, the effects on the HRV were investigated. Different parameters derived from the HRV are suggested to be modified in parallel with either change in sympathovagal balance, thereby providing quantitative markers of autonomic activity [ , ]. There are no previous reports in animal experiments on the effects of lead poisoning on HRV. However, some clinical studies indicate that individuals exposed to lead can exhibit changes that include reduced HRV and RMSSD [ , ]. Our findings presented here suggest reductions in HR variance and RMSSD indexes with an increased LF power, which further suggest reduced vagus nerve-mediated autonomic control of HR and increased sympathetic tone in adult rats subjected to low-level lead exposure. In fact, a clinical study of 70 exposed workers with blood lead concentrations of ~24 μg/dL revealed a diminished HRV, which was attributed to vagal depression [ ]. Under resting conditions, the autonomic balance usually favours vagal modulation. However, this sympathovagal balance can indeed change under different pathological conditions, shifting to a predominance of the sympathetic component [ , ]. In addition to an increased sympathetic tone, vagal activity also decreased, which is present in cardiovascular pathologies, such as hypertension, heart failure and myocardial infarction, and has been associated with an increased onset of tachyarrhythmias and the risk of mortality [ ]. Finally, the analysis of HR changes after pharmacological blockade of vagal and sympathetic tones [ ] was used to support previous evidence of autonomic change. Our results confirmed the previous HRV findings and reinforced that chronic administration of lead acetate modified the sympathovagal balance on the control of HR in rats, even at a low dose. There was a significant impairment on the methylatropine-sensitive component of the HR (i.e. vagal tone), which is associated with an increased atenolol-sensitive component of the HR (i.e. sympathetic tone).
Based on the present findings, we cannot state whether changes in the autonomic tone have central or peripheral origins, or both. Reddy et al. [ ] suggested that lead exposure in rats can selectively affect cholinergic neurotransmission in brain areas such as the hippocampus, cerebellum and cerebral cortex, which control learning and cognitive functions. Similar to that described for the cardiovascular system, it has been proposed that lead can cause CNS injury by increasing oxidative stress throughout the brain [ ]. Despite studies showing the effects of lead on the monoaminergic [ ], glutamatergic [ ] and cholinergic systems [ ], important neurotransmissions integrating brain regions of autonomic responses, data about key autonomic nuclei such as the NTS and hypothalamic defence areas are scarce. Only Guimarães et al. [ ] recently demonstrated that lead is capable of accumulating in the NTS and hypothalamus and increasing microglia and astrocyte activation in rats exposed to lead from the gestational to postnatal period. Thus, because astrocytes may play a role in mediating cardiovascular reflex integration through the NTS [ ], and central oxidative stress plays an important role in inducing sympathetic hyperactivity [ ], this could be a putative pathophysiological substrate for the central effects of lead-induced autonomic dysfunction evidenced by the present work.
Interestingly, the intrinsic HR assessed after the double blockage of cardiac muscarinic and adrenergic receptors was reduced after lead exposure, suggesting a depressor effect on pacemaker activity. Regarding the effects of lead on cardiac tissue, experimental data indicate different effects depending on both the dose and time of exposure. Prentice and Kopp [ ] originally demonstrated that 30 µM lead when applied acutely can prolong the atrioventricular node conduction, reduce coronary flow, decrease HR and decrease the contractile response to calcium in isolated and perfused rat hearts. Moreover, we previously showed that isolated rat cardiac muscles exposed to 8 µM lead acetate exhibited increased contractility [ ], but 30–100 µM lead decreased force by reducing calcium influx and myosin ATPase activity [ ]. Nevertheless, by using a chronic model of lead exposure in the rat, Fioresi et al. [ ] demonstrated that despite no change in the contractile force of isolated cardiac muscle, there was strong evidence of impaired sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) function.
Regarding this, it was recently proposed that SR activity is one of the mechanisms considered to maintain the pacemaker activity of the heart by acting as a biological clock organelle [ ]. Although there are no data about the effects of lead specifically on cardiac muscle impulse generation and the conduction system, it is possible to speculate that SR dysfunction in the pacemaker cells should alter the intrinsic HR during lead intoxication. Additionally, lead has been reported to be capable of, acutely and chronically, activating hyperpolarising efflux currents in different animal species and cells, such as mouse [ ] and snail neurons [ ], rat vascular smooth muscle [ , ] and human erythrocyte [ ]. Ultimately, we also might speculate that this reduced intrinsic HR could be a compensatory mechanism to prevent persistent tachycardia due to sympathetic hyperactivity on the heart.
In conclusion, the results presented here demonstrate for the first time that controlled lead administration for 30 days in rats increased BP decreased baroreflex sensitivity and induced a sympathovagal imbalance in HR control. The finding that the cardiac autonomic modulation is altered by chronic lead exposure reinforces the idea that even at low concentrations, such a condition might be associated with an increased cardiovascular risk.