Introduction
The anesthetization of patients with myocardial infarction remains challenging. Since anesthetics suppress heart function, the life-threatening risk in patients with heart failure or cardiac arrhythmia increases [ ]. Presently, etomidate is a preferred anesthetic agent for these patients due to its stable hemodynamic effect [ , ].
Sevoflurane is a volatile anesthetic developed in recent years. It has been received the support of anesthesiologists because of several advantages, including quick induction, intraoperative hemodynamics stability, and comprehensive anesthetic action [ , ]. Adverse reactions to sevoflurane are similar to other inhalation anesthetics including hypotension, cardiac arrhythmia, nausea, and vomiting. Despite these drawbacks, the hemodynamic stability of sevoflurane remains favorable even at high inhalation concentrations in both old and young patients [ , , ]. A study of coronary artery bypass surgery confirmed that the systolic blood pressure and the diastolic blood pressure dropped slightly upon the anesthetic induction by sevoflurane when it was administrated with either tidal volume breathing or vital capacity breaths, but heart rate and ST segment remained unchanged [ ].
Therefore, sevoflurane represents a potentially attractive alternative to etomidate for patients with myocardial infarction. However, to date, no study has been reported to address its suitability for administration to such patients. The main objective of this study is to evaluate the safety issue of sevoflurane for its possible application in patients with myocardial infarction using a mouse model of myocardial ischemic infarction.
Materials and Methods
Animals and Animal Care
Male C57BL/6 mice, aged 7–12 weeks old and weighed 20–30 g, were obtained from Beijing Vital River Experimental Animal Breeding and Research Center, a Chinese government-accredited experiment animal breeding and research center. Animal care and experimental procedure closely followed the guideline of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Sichuan University and approved by the IACUC.
Induction of Acute Myocardial Infarction
Myocardial infarction was induced by left anterior descending coronary artery ligation. Anesthesia of mice was induced using 4 % isoflurane and then intubated and ventilated with mixed gas (100 % O 2 + 1–2 % isoflurane) using a small-animal respirator (Chengdu instrument plant). The thoracotomy was performed in the fourth left intercostal space. The left ventricle was visualized, the pericardial sac was removed, and the left anterior descending artery was permanently ligated using a 7/0 monofilament sutures (Shanghai Pudong Jinhuan Medical Instrument Co. LTD) at the site of its emergence from the left atrium. Significant color change at the ischemic area was considered indicative of successful coronary occlusion. The thoracotomy was closed with 5/0 monofilament sutures (Shanghai Pudong Jinhuan Medical Instrument Co. LTD). The endotracheal tube was removed once spontaneous respiration resumed, and mice were placed under a warm light until they were completely awake.
Echocardiography
Anesthesia of mice was induced using 4 % isoflurane and maintained with 1–2 % isoflurane. Two-dimensional echocardiographic measurements were performed. All mice were subjected to transthoracic echocardiographic evaluation with a 12-MHz transducer (i13L, Vivi7 Dimension, GE) in the left lateral position 30 days after LAD ligation. The ejection fraction (EF) of the left ventricle was evaluated with the Simpson’s single-plane method. Left ventricular end diastolic volume (LVEDV) and left ventricular end systolic volume (LVESV) were recorded: EF = (LVEDV − LVESV)/LVEDV × 100 %.
Hemodynamic Monitoring
Pentobarbital sodium 80 mg/kg was used as primary anesthetic agent through intraperitoneal injection in mice 30 days after LAD ligation (EF < 50 %). A 22G venous indwelling needle was inserted after tracheotomy as an endotracheal tube, and mechanical ventilation was started by a ventilator (VT, tidal volume 0.6–0.8 ml; RR, respiratory rate 110 times/min; I : E 2:3; Chengdu instrument plant). A catheter was inserted into left internal jugular vein, and a detection electrode (AD Instruments) was inserted into left ventricular reversely by the right common carotid artery. Indices of hemodynamics were recorded and stored 20 min after sevoflurane or etomidate was delivered. Changes in blood pressure and heart rate were recorded at the time before anesthetic administration as baseline and at the time point when diastolic pressure was lowered after anesthetic administration, and the patterns in these changes induced by the two anesthetic agents were compared.
Ventricular Arrhythmia Monitoring
Ventricular arrhythmia was monitored by a hemodynamic monitoring system (Labchart, AD Instruments) from the time point of anesthetic (sevoflurane or etomidate) delivery to the time point of low diastolic blood pressure. An abnormal QRS wave accompanied by unstable hemodynamics was identified as a premature systole. The number of premature systoles was recorded and compared before and after anesthetics delivery.
Dose Regimen of Etomidate
The dose range for mice was calculated according to the clinical dose of etomidate as 1.85–3.70 mg/kg based on a 12.33 coefficient between humans and mice in the administration of etomidate. The low and moderate doses in this study were selected as 1.85 and 2.62 mg/kg. The moderate dose was calculated as (1.85 × 3.70)1/2 = 2.62 mg/kg. The quantity, injection speed, and the volume of the anesthetics are known to affect hemodynamics greatly [ , , ]. We controlled the injection speed and volume of the drug strictly in order to avoid the effect of non-anesthesia factors in the course of injection of etomidate in the experiment of hemodynamics. To exclude the effect of non-anesthetic factors, a standard infusing rate was calculated such that the moderate dose (2.62 mg/kg) was infused into a 20 g mouse in 2 min. A primary etomidate concentration of 200 μg/0.1 ml was used requiring a 0.786 ml/h standard infusing rate.
Dose regimen of Sevoflurane
The clinical concentration of sevoflurane (Shanghai Hengrui Medicine Co. Ltd) is 1–2 MAC. The MAC of sevoflurane of mice is 2.8 % such that the range of administered concentration for mice is 2.8–5.6 %. The low and moderate doses in this study were selected as 2.8 and 4.0 %, respectively. An incremental method of concentration was employed due to its slight effect on circulation. The procedure to administer the dose was to open the evaporation jar from 0 in increments of 0.2 % at 15 s intervals until the target concentration was achieved.
Determination of Half Lethal Dose (LD50)
At 39 days after LAD ligation, mice with EF < 60 % (evaluated by echocardiography before test) were included in the experiment. A method of “up and down” was adopted to determine the LD 50 . In this method, an equal ratio number series was formed around the LD 50 of control mice with an equal ratio coefficient of 1.5. If the tested mouse survived the primary dose, the next mouse would be given a higher dose. If that mouse died, the subsequent mouse would be given a lower dose. The experiment was repeated until there were five live–die shifts in six continuously tested mice or three mice continuously lived.
Concrete Operation
The gradients of dose of etomidate were as follows: 66.38, 44.25, 29.50, 19.67, 13.11, and 8.74 mg/Kg. The prepared dose was injected into the tail vein after a mouse was pushed into a fixator (the primary dose was chosen as LD 50 of control mice, 29.5 mg/Kg), and the time of injection was 2 s. The gradients of concentrations of sevoflurane were: 8.0, 5.3, 3.5, and 2.4 %. The prepared concentration was inhaled by the mouse, and the incremental method concentration was selected after the mouse was seized firmly (the primary concentration was chosen as LC 50 of control mice, 8.0 %). The electrocardiography was established after the onset of anesthesia. The mouse was put into a self-designed roll aeration device, and the concentration of sevoflurane inside roll was monitored through its gas outlet by a volatile anesthetic monitor. The observed time was 60 min after the concentration inside roll reached the desired level. The LD 50 of two anesthetics was calculated, and the TI (therapy index) was calculated according to TI = LD50/ED50.
Electrocardiogram Monitoring
Electrocardiograms were recorded using an electrocardiograph (BL-420S, Chengdu Taimeng Technology Co. Ltd). The leads of the electrocardiograph were connected in subcutaneous tissue near the elbow and knee joint of limbs after mice were administered anesthetic (sevoflurane or etomidate). Stable and clear ECGs were saved after adjusting the location of the electrode and corresponding parameters. The ventricular fibrillation or sinus arrest was identified along with animal death.
Histopathological Examination
After the determination of LD 50 for the two anesthetics, the hearts were harvested and then fixed in 4 % formaldehyde solution for paraffin block preparation. Thin sections were cut and stained for microscopic examination. Heart pathology of some mice 30 days after LAD ligation was performed to identify the successful establishment of the model of mice with myocardial infarction by HE and Masson’s trichrome stain, and the hearts obtained from the anesthesia experimental animals were subjected to the same pathological examination.
Statistical Analysis
All data were expressed as mean ± SEM. Echo-derived and hemodynamic indices between the two groups were compared using independent sample T test, and the indices of different time points within a group were compared using RMANOVA. A SPSS 18.0 statistical package (SPSS, Chicago, IL) was used, and significant difference was assumed when P values were <0.05.
Results
Evaluation of Mouse Model with Myocardial Infarction
The results of M-mode ultrasound examination of mice 30 days after LAD ligation showed that EF and FS of left ventricles decreased significantly (Fig. 1 ), indicating weakened contractile function of left ventricles. Histopathological results showed that the left ventricular cavity became larger and the left ventricular wall became thinner in the LAD ligation mice relative to control mice. In addition, Masson staining showed a large amount of collage deposition along with few inflammatory cells infiltration in the LAD ligation mouse hearts (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 1 Comparison of cardiac function between control “Normal” and myocardial infarction “30 days after MI” groups ( n = 10 in each group, ** p < 0.01). MI myocardial infarction, EF ejection fraction, FS fractional shortening, ESV end systolic volume, LVIDs left ventricular systolic internal diameter, EDV end diastolic volume, LVIDd left ventricular diastolic internal diameter Fig. 2 Histological examination of changes in myocardial infarction stained by Masson. The left ventricular cavity of mice 30 days after LAD ligation became larger relative to that of normal mice and the left ventricular wall became thinner. a normal mice, b mice 30 days after LAD ligation. Scale bars 1 mm
Cardiac Effect of Sevoflurane Relative to Etomidate
In comparison with mice subjected to low dose of etomidate (1.85 mg/kg) injection, those exposed to low concentration of sevoflurane (2.8 %) displayed significant decreases in the parameters including P mean , dp/dt max , dp/dt min , P @dp/dt max , HR, and RPP ( p < 0.05) at T min versus T 0 (Fig. 3 ). As the exposure concentration of sevoflurane was increased, a further significant decrease in P max , P mean , HR, dp/dt max , dp/dt min , and P @dp/dt max was observed, but these parameters were not significantly altered in mice injected with higher concentration of etomidate (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 3 Comparison of hemodynamic changes in response to lower concentration of sevoflurane or lower dose of etomidate. a P max , b P min , c P mean , d HR, e dp/dt max , f dp/dt min , g P @dp/dt max , h RPP before ( T 0 ) and after ( T min ) anesthetic was administered to group “E1” and group “S1” ( n = 13, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01). Group E1 (low dose of etomidate, 1.85 mg/kg), n = 6; Group S1 (low concentration of sevoflurane, 2.8 %), n = 7; T 0 —baseline, time point of pre-anesthesia; T min —the time point of low diastolic blood pressure. Dose or concentration range of mice was calculated according to clinical dose or concentration of etomidate and sevoflurane Fig. 4 Comparison of hemodynamic changes in response to higher concentration of sevoflurane or higher dose of etomidate. a P max , b P min , c P mean , d HR, e dp/dt max , f dp/dt min , g P @dp/dt max , h RPP before ( T 0 ) and after ( T min ) anesthetic was administered to group “E2” and group “S2” ( n = 11, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01). Group E2 (higher dose of etomidate, 2.62 mg/kg), n = 5; Group S2 (higher concentration of sevoflurane, 4.0 %), n = 6; T 0 —baseline, time point of pre-anesthesia; T min —the time point of low diastolic blood pressure
Overall Effect of Sevoflurane Relative to Etomidate
The estimated LD 50 value with 95 % confidence interval for mice exposed to sevoflurane was 4.3 %; 95 % CI 3.0–6.3 %, and mice exposed to etomidate was 24.1 mg/Kg; 95 % CI 18.20–31.91 mg/Kg. Further analysis revealed that the therapy index of sevoflurane was 4.3/1.4 = 3.1 %, which is 52.5 % that of control mice, and the therapy index of etomidate was 24.1/1.02 = 23.6 mg/kg, which is 81.5 % that of control mice.
Discussion
Experimental and clinical attempts have been made to meet the challenge of selection of anesthesia to patients with myocardial infarction. However, at present, etomidate remains the preferred option due to its hemodynamic stability and other prominent advantages [ , ]. Sevoflurane has become a focus for clinical development as an alternate agent for patients with cardiac events because of its current acceptance by an increasing number of anesthesiologists in the use for many surgeries. To meet this need, the present study was thus undertaken using mouse model of myocardial ischemic infarction to specifically address the safety issue of sevoflurane as an anesthetic agent for potential use for patients with myocardial infarction. The data obtained clearly demonstrated that in comparison with etomidate, sevoflurane is not a recommended substitute.
The mouse model of myocardial ischemic infarction used in the present study was developed by subjecting adult mice to a permanent coronary artery ligation for 30 days, simulating clinical patients about a half year after myocardial infarction. In the mouse model, an inflammation period was reported to take place in the first day after myocardial ischemia [ ], and the area of myocardial infarction was gradually increased thereafter and was stabilized about 30 days after the operation [ ]. The analysis of the present model at 30 days after the surgery demonstrated that the cavity of the left ventricle became larger and the ventricular wall became thinner. This left ventricle remodeling was accompanied by a decrease in cardiac function, validating a surrogate model for humans one half year after myocardial infarction.
Cardiac hemodynamic analysis indicated that the use of sevoflurane relative to etomidate in control mice at the concentration producing the anesthetic effect equivalent to that produced by etomidate at clinically relevant dose did not cause different changes. This agrees with clinical observations that sevoflurane is intraoperative hemodynamic stability in the application of patients without cardiac events [ , ]. However, when the same dose regiment was applied to mice with myocardial infarction, sevoflurane, at both low and high concentrations, showed unstable hemodynamics and depressed cardiac contractility as reflected by decreased P max value. In contrast, etomidate did not show these adverse effects at both low and high doses in the same subjects. These hemodynamic variations caused by sevoflurane were also observed previously in humans [ ].
The parameters dp/dt max , dp/dt min , and P @dp/dt max , reflecting cardiac systolic and diastolic function, are widely used for monitoring cardiac hemodynamics in recent years [ , , ]. The declines in these parameters caused by sevoflurane in mice with myocardial infarction further indicate that this agent causes unstable hemodynamic changes in subjects with cardiac events, but etomidate did not cause these changes.
In a previous study, it was noted that sevoflurane induced periodic bradycardia that was not reversed upon decreasing the level of anesthesia without the administration of atropine [ ]. A study of 30 cases of coronary artery bypass surgery showed that the systolic blood pressure (SBP) and the diastolic blood pressure (DBP) dropped slightly upon the induction of sevoflurane administered with tidal volume breathing or with vital capacity breaths, but the heart rate and ST segment did not change obviously compared with the level of pre-anesthesia [ ]. We also observed that the drop of blood pressure was not accompanied by variations in heart rate.
Our study indicated that sevoflurane had little effect on systemic vascular resistance in mice as reflected by little changes in P min at either low or high concentration of sevoflurane. However, a study in dogs showed that sevoflurane and isoflurane induced a decrease in systemic vascular resistance [ ]. A study in clinical trials also found that the left ventricular end systolic tension decreased while sevoflurane was inhaled with N 2 O together [ ]. Species difference may explain the variation in the observations on the effects of sevoflurane on vascular resistance; however, the vessel dilation effect observed in dogs and humans should be taken into account for consideration for the clinical application of sevoflurane.
Therapeutic index is a common parameter for estimating the safety of a drug. The safety margins for both sevoflurane and etomidate are relatively larger when applied to subjects without cardiac events. In this study, a decrease in this safety margin was observed for both sevoflurane and etomidate when these agents were applied to mice with myocardial infarction. However, the extent of this decrease for sevoflurane was much more than that for etomidate, 50 % versus 20 %, further indicating that sevoflurane is not as good as etomidate when applied to patients with myocardial infarction.
In summary, the safety issue of sevoflurane for its use for patients with myocardial infarction, in comparison with currently available agent etomidate, was evaluated using a surrogate mouse model of myocardial ischemic infarction. The data obtained through analyzing changes in hemodynamic stability and therapeutic index indicate that sevoflurane should not be recommended for the use as a substitute for patients with myocardial infarction, although its use for patients without cardiac events may not be different from that of etomidate.