Introduction
Hypercholesterolemia and ensuing atherosclerosis have been implicated as the most important factors in the pathophysiology of coronary artery disease and myocardial ischemia (MI) [ , ]. Previous studies have reported that post-ischemic myocardial apoptosis is markedly more common in hypercholesterolemic rabbits, suggesting that hypercholesterolemia may aggravate myocardial apoptotic death and thus contribute to increased cardiac vulnerability to ischemia/reperfusion in hypercholesterolemia [ ]. Lipid accumulation and subsequent development of atherosclerotic plaques, coronary spasms around existing atherosclerotic lesions, production of enhanced reactive oxygen species, and resultant endothelial dysfunction have been shown to play causative roles in hypercholesterolemia-initiated MI. However, the increased susceptibility of the hypercholesterolemic heart to ischemia and reperfusion injury cannot be wholly explained by these reasons and mechanisms, and many fundamental questions remain unresolved.
There is considerable evidence that hypercholesterolemia leads to an increase in the cholesterol-to-phospholipid (C/P) ratio and a decreased fluidity in erythrocyte membranes, consequently altering cell functions [ ]. Appropriate membrane fluidity plays important role in a number of cellular functions, including carrier-mediated transport, ion exchange, energy transfer, and regulation of enzyme activity. Many factors influence membrane fluidity. Those involved in lipid composition, such as C/P ratio, are considered especially important. In earlier studies, alterations in membrane fluidity were found to take place before changes in general morphology and biology in the disease process. Membrane fluidity is considered a sensitive indicator of cell injury during the early stages of the disease. However, whether the membrane fluidity of myocardial cells is changed in hypercholesterolemic hearts and the role of any such change in increased susceptibility to injury remains unknown.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ), a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily of ligand-activated transcription factors, is a key regulator of adipogenesis and lipid metabolism [ ]. It plays a critical role in the regulation of a variety of biological processes within the cardiovascular system [ ]. In addition to their well-described insulin-sensitizing properties, synthetic PPARγ agonists have been shown to improve cardiovascular function in diabetic patients and diabetic animal models [ ]. Clinical studies have shown that treatment with PPARγ agonists such as pioglitazone (PIO) significantly improves plasma lipid levels in type 2 diabetic patients and dyslipidemia [ ]. Previous works demonstrate that rosiglitazone (RSG, a PPARγ agonist) treatment in vivo can significantly reduce MI/reperfusion injury in hypercholesterolemic rabbits [ ]. Treatment with a PPARγ agonist has been shown to affect the activity of certain membrane-bound enzymes in cultured endothelial cells [ ]. However, whether or not PPARγ agonists may increase the membrane fluidity of myocardial cells and thus protect the heart in a more clinically relevant model of more severe heart injury, such as myocardial ischemia and reperfusion in hypercholesterolemic animals, has not been previously studied.
For these reasons, the purposes of the present study were (1) to determine whether diet-induced hypercholesterolemia decreases the membrane fluidity of myocardial cells; if so, (2) to determine whether decreased membrane fluidity of myocardial cells contributes to enhanced myocardial injury in hypercholesterolemic animals; and (3) to determine whether treatment with PIO may upregulate membrane fluidity of myocardial cells and thus reduce myocardial injury.
Materials and Methods
Animals and Dietary Protocol
These investigations were performed in accordance with the Guiding Principles in the Use and Care of Animals, published by the National Institutes of Health (NIH Publication No. 85—23, Revised 1996). They were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Capital Medical University.
Before conducting the experiment, male Wistar rats weighing 110.0 ± 10.0 g were provided with food and water ad libitum. Blood was drawn from the tail of each rat, and baseline plasma lipids were determined using assay kits. Then rats were divided into two groups at random. The control group ( n = 24) was given a normal diet, and the high-cholesterol (HC) group ( n = 32) was given an HC diet (Beijing HFK Bioscience Co., Ltd, which contains 1 % cholesterol, 10 % egg yolk powder, and 5 % lard) for 10 weeks. Six weeks into the HC diet regimen, the rats’ blood was redrawn and plasma lipid levels were determined. Thereafter, the rats in the HC group were randomly assigned to receive either vehicle ( n = 16) or PIO (10 mg/kg/day, oral gavage; n = 16) for the remaining 4 weeks.
Determination of Myocardial Function
At the end of 10 weeks, rats were selected at random from each group ( n = 6–8). As a marker of cardiac function, the left ventricular pressure (LVP) was measured as previously described [ ]. Left ventricular systolic pressure (LVSP), left ventricular diastolic pressure (LVDP), and the maximum positive and negative values of the instantaneous first derivative of LVP (+dP/dt max and −dP/dt max ) were derived using computer algorithms. After recording, the heart was quickly excised; the cardiac tissue was processed for subsequent experiments using the procedures described below.
Preparation of Myocardial Membranes
Tissue samples were isolated from the ventricular free walls and minced in 15 ml of iced buffer A (0.25 mol/l sucrose, 5 mmol/l Tris–HCl, 1 mmol/l MgCl 2 , 1 mmol/l EDTA, and 10 μmol/l phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), pH 7.4). The samples were homogenized with a DY89-1 glass Dounce Homogenizer for 30 s at 30–40 times/min. The homogenate was filtered through three layers of cheesecloth and centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and centrifuged at 45,500 g for 25 min at 4 °C, and then the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was re-suspended in 15 ml iced buffer B (50 mmol/l Tris-HCl, 10 mmol/l MgCl 2 , 1 mmol/l EDTA, and 10 μmol/l PMSF) with five strokes in a 20-ml Dounce-type putter and re-centrifuged at 45,500 g for 25 min at 4 °C. This step was performed twice, and the pellet was re-suspended in an appropriate volume of buffer B to obtain a protein content of 1 mg/ml [ ]. Protein content was determined using a method described by Lowry et al. The membrane preparations were stored at −80 °C for later analysis of ATPase activity.
Detection of Membrane Na+–K+-ATPase Activity
Na + –K + -ATPase activity, a cell membrane enzyme marker, was determined by inorganic phosphate (Pi) with an ATPase assay kit (Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The content of cardiac myocyte membrane protein was measured by Lowry’s modified assay [ ] to calibrate Na + –K + -ATPase activity. The results are presented as micromole of Pi per milligram protein per hour.
Detection of Cholesterol and Phospholipid Content in Myocardial Cell Membrane
One milliliter of cardiac myocyte suspension was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 20 min. Then the precipitate was transferred to 2 ml chloroform–methanol 2:1 (v/v) and vortexed for 60 min at room temperature. The upper-layer liquid phase was the membrane lipid extract, which was evaporated to dryness under a stream of nitrogen for later experiments [ ].
The membrane cholesterol content was determined with a cholesterol kit (BioSino Bio-technology and Science Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The results are presented as micromoles of cholesterol per milligram protein.
Using 1 mol phospholipid containing 1 mol inorganic phosphate, the total phospholipid levels in the membranes were calculated through inorganic phosphate. The dried membrane lipids were dissolved with 0.5 ml of 70 % perchloric acid for 15 min, heated on an electric heater, and digested, producing a colorless solution. A fix phosphorus agent (Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute) was added to the cooled solution and mixed. Then it was incubated at 45 °C for 20 min. Inorganic phosphate of the membrane lipids was determined at 660 nm in a spectrophotometer at room temperature. Then it was calculated according to a standard curve (5–50 μmol of Pi) and expressed as micromoles of Pi per milligram protein [ ].
Finally, the (C/P) ratio of cardiac myocytes membrane was calculated.
Membrane Fluidity Measurements
Cardiac myocytes were enzymatically isolated as described previously [ ]. Then cells were suspended in Tyrode’s solution containing 1 mM calcium (room temperature) for measurement of membrane fluidity.
1,6-Diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH), served as the fluorescent probe for indicating the fluidity of the cell membrane [ ], was dissolved in tetrahydrofuran at a concentration of 2 × 10 −3 mol/l. For cell labeling, the solution of DPH was diluted 1000-fold with phosphate-buffered saline. The dispersion of DPH working dilution (2 × 10 −6 mol/l) was clear and practically lacking in fluorescence. One milliliter of this fluorescent probe solution was added to 1 ml of cellular suspension (2 × 10 6 cells/ml) to get a final probe concentration of 10 −6 mol/l.
The incorporation of DPH into cardiac myocytes membranes was followed by a steep increase in fluorescence intensity. After 30 min of incubation at room temperature, the cell suspension was centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded, the precipitated cells were washed in Tyrode’s buffer and re-centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min, and the supernatant was discarded again. The unlabeled DPH was cleared, and then the labeled cardiac myocytes were re-suspended in 1 ml Tyrode’s buffer and used for fluorescence detections at room temperature.
DPH fluorescence polarization was measured with a spectrofluorimeter (RF-5000 Shimadzu, Japan). The excitation and emission wavelengths of monochromators were positioned at 362 and 432 nm, respectively, with slit width set to 10 nm for both excitation and emission modes. The DPH fluorescence polarization ( P ) was obtained by the following equation: P = (IVV−GIVH)/(IVV + GIVH), G = IHV/IHH, where IVV and IVH represent the fluorescence intensity parallel and perpendicular to the excitation plane (when set vertically), respectively; G is a correction factor for difference in the transmission efficiency for vertically and horizontally polarized light; and IHH represents the fluorescence intensity parallel to the excitation plane when set horizontally. For DPH, the fluorescence polarization values depend on probe rotational mobility and the arrangement of membrane molecules; changes in fluorescence polarization values have been correlated with changes in membrane microviscosity. In general, an increase of fluorescence polarization indicates an increase in microviscosity and therefore a decrease in fluidity. Assuming, on physical grounds, that fluidity is the reciprocal of fluorescence polarization and viscosity, the microviscosity ( η ) was determined using the following equation: η = 2 P /(0.46− P ).
Determination of cAMP with Radioimmunoassay
cAMP levels in ventricular myocytes were determined by [ 125 I] cAMP radioimmunoassay using commercially available kits (Shanghai Chinese Medicine University, China). Details of the methods for extracting cAMP were adapted from protocols reported by Steiner et al. [ ]. The extract was dissolved in 1.0 ml of 50 mM sodium acetate buffer, and 0.1 ml aliquots were acetylated and assayed for cAMP in duplicates according to the kit instructions. The results of duplicate assays were averaged.
Determination of the Size of the Myocardial Infarct
Rats were also picked at random from each group at the end of 10 weeks (each group, n = 6–8). They were anesthetized with 10 % chloral hydrate solution, and myocardial ischemia (MI, 30 min) and reperfusion (24 h) were performed as described in our previous study [ ]. Sham MI/R rats were subjected to the same surgical procedures as MI/R rats, except that the coronary artery was not tied. At the end of the 24-h reperfusion period, the ligature around the coronary artery was retied through the previous ligation. The ischemia/reperfusion area (area at risk, AAR) was identified using negative Evans blue dye staining, and the infarcted area was identified using negative triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining. The Evan’s blue-stained area (area not at risk), TTC-stained area (ischemic but viable tissue), and TTC-negative staining area (infarcted myocardium) were digitally measured with an Image-Pro Plus 6.0. The size of the myocardial infarct is expressed as a percentage of infarct area divided by total AAR.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were performed with SPSS software (version 13.0). Statistical analyses were carried out using one-way ANOVA, two-way ANOVA, and linear correlation analysis. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
PIO Affected Plasma Lipid Profiles After High-Cholesterol Diet
Ten weeks of HC diet resulted in a dramatic increase in plasma cholesterol (CHO; 10 vs. 0 week: 3.44 ± 0.86 vs. 1.24 ± 0.26 mmol/l, P < 0.01), triglyceride (TG; 10 vs. 0 week: 1.13 ± 0.34 vs. 0.26 ± 0.05 mmol/l, P < 0.01), and low-density lipoprotein (LDL; 10 vs. 0 week: 1.66 ± 0.55 vs. 0.45 ± 0.14 mmol/l, P < 0.01). There were no significant differences between groups in plasma lipid profiles before the onset of the study (time 0) or after 6 weeks of a HC diet (before PIO treatment; Table 1 ). After an additional 4 weeks of high-cholesterol diet and treated with vehicle, plasma CHO, TG, and LDL levels further increased. At all these post-cholesterol times, PIO-treated rats on the HC diet exhibited significantly lower plasma CHO, TG, and LDL values than the vehicle group (all P < 0.05). In addition, the plasma CHO, TG, and LDL levels increased, respectively, 1–2, 1–3, and 1–3 times in the present research. The animal model was similar to clinical case, referred to the classification of cholesterol and triglyceride levels presented by 2014 NLA [ ]. Table 1 Lipid profiles in vehicle-treated ( n = 16) and pioglitazone-treated ( n = 16) groups CHO (mmol/l) TG (mmol/l) LDL (mmol/l) Vehicle PIO Vehicle PIO Vehicle PIO 0 week 1.24 ± 0.26 1.28 ± 0.25 0.26 ± 0.05 0.24 ± 0.06 0.45 ± 0.14 0.52 ± 0.15 6 weeks 2.69 ± 0.27 2.59 ± 0.17 0.88 ± 0.35 0.90 ± 0.28 1.00 ± 0.21 1.12 ± 0.15 10 weeks 3.44 ± 0.86 ** 2.16 ± 0.33 # 1.13 ± 0.34 ** 0.59 ± 0.18 # 1.66 ± 0.55 ** 1.24 ± 0.28 # Values are expressed as mean ± SEM (two-way ANOVA) CHO cholesterol, TG triglyceride, LDL low-density lipoprotein ** P < 0.01 versus week 0 # P < 0.05 versus HC + vehicle group at week 10
Hypercholesterolemia Worsens Cardiac Function and Exacerbates Post-ischemic Myocardial Injury
The HC diet markedly aggravated myocardial contractile function, as shown in Fig. 1 a, b, c. The values of LVSP, +dp/dt max , and –dp/dt max were significantly lower in the HC group than in the normal diet group (all P < 0.01). Additionally, ischemia/reperfusion-induced myocardial infarct size in the HC rats (i.e., vehicle) was significantly larger than in the normal rats (56.0 ± 3.9 vs. 34.9 ± 1.5 %, P < 0.01; Fig. 1 d). There was no difference in ischemic area (area at risk, AAR), here expressed as the portion of the left ventricle, indicating a comparable degree of ischemic insult between groups given sham treatment, normal diet, vehicle, and PIO after left anterior descending artery occlusion (data not shown). Fig. 1 a Baseline LVSP, b left ventricular + dP/dt max , c left ventricular −dP/dt max in three experimental groups, d size of the myocardial infarct in different groups. At the top of d , representative photomicrographs of heart sections obtained from rats in sham, normal diet, high-cholesterol (HC) diet with vehicle and PIO groups subjected to myocardial ischemia and reperfusion are shown. Blue portion : non-ischemic, normal region; red portion : ischemic–reperfused but not infarcted region; negatively stained portion : ischemic–reperfused and infarcted region. At the bottom of d : column graph of myocardial infarct size expressed as a percentage of total ischemic–reperfused area [area at risk (AAR)]. Values are mean ± SEM ( n = 6 animals for each group; one-way ANOVA). Inf infarct area. ** P < 0.01 versus normal diet group; ## P < 0.01 versus HC + vehicle group (Color figure online)
Hypercholesterolemia Decreased Membrane Na+–K+-ATPase Activity, Increased C/P Ratio, and Decreased Membrane Fluidity of Cardiac Myocytes
Na + –K + -ATPases are found in cell membranes, but not in organelle membranes. Their activity is useful in the identification of the cell membranes. As summarized in Fig. 2 a, less Na + –K + -ATPase activity was observed in HC rats than in normal diet rats (5.99 ± 1.69 vs. 7.88 ± 1.25 μmol Pi/mg protein/h, P < 0.01). The C/P ratio of cardiac myocytes membrane was significantly higher in rats on HC diet than in rats on normal diet (0.44 ± 0.04 vs. 0.33 ± 0.03, P < 0.01; Fig. 2 b). Most importantly, in myocardial cells from HC rats, DPH fluorescence polarization ( P ) was significantly more pronounced (Fig. 2 c) and microviscosity ( η ) was significantly higher than in the normal diet group (0.34 ± 0.07 vs. 0.24 ± 0.05, P < 0.01; 7.99 ± 1.37 vs. 2.41 ± 0.59, P < 0.01, respectively), indicating that hypercholesterolemia decreased the fluidity of the membranes of cardiac myocytes. Fig. 2 a Cardiac cell membrane Na + –K + -ATPase activity, b membrane C/P, c membrane DPH fluorescence polarization, and d cAMP concentration of myocardial cell in rats fed a normal diet, HC diet, and PIO-treated HC diet. Values are mean ± SEM ( n = 6 animals for each group; one-way ANOVA). ** P < 0.01 versus normal diet group; # P < 0.05, ## P < 0.01 versus HC + vehicle group
Hypercholesterolemia Decreased Myocardial cAMP Content
To further elucidate the effect by which hypercholesterolemia may disturb myocardial function, myocardial cAMP content, which is a downstream product in signal transduction pathway of membrane receptor, was determined. As shown in Fig. 2 d, hypercholesterolemia decreased myocardial cAMP content significantly ( P < 0.01). This result demonstrated that hypercholesterolemia may damage myocardial function and thus contribute to increased myocardial vulnerability after ischemia and reperfusion.
PIO Treatment Improved Myocardial Contractile Function, Increased Na+–K+-ATPase Activity and cAMP Content, Reduced C/P Ratio, Restored Membrane Fluidity, and Decreased Myocardial Infarct Size
Previous studies have demonstrated that PPARγ agonists, such as rosiglitazone (RSG), exert beneficial cardiovascular effects in diabetic patients. In recent studies, researchers have demonstrated that treatment with RSG can significantly improve endothelial and myocardial function in hypercholesterolemic rabbits [ , ]. To determine whether the PPARγ signaling pathway may improve cardiac function by restoring membrane fluidity in a non-diabetic model, 16 rats fed a high-cholesterol diet were treated with PIO for 4 weeks. Treatment with PIO markedly attenuated cardiac contractile dysfunction (LVSP, +dp/dt max and –dp/dt max ) and myocardial infarct size than hypercholesterolemic rats (Fig. 1 ). PIO treatment significantly increased Na + –K + -ATPase activity (7.43 ± 1.42 μmol Pi/mg protein/h, P < 0.01) and decreased C/P ratio (0.40 ± 0.04, P < 0.05) in cardiac myocytes membrane (Fig. 2 a, b). In addition, treatment with PIO markedly decreased both DPH fluorescence polarization (0.26 ± 0.06, P < 0.01) (Fig. 2 c) and microviscosity (3.29 ± 0.63, P < 0.01), which primarily reflects membrane fluidity. To determine the mechanism by which PIO may exert its cardiac protective properties, the cAMP content in myocardial cell of PIO treatment was determined. As shown in Fig. 2 d, treatment with PIO in hypercholesterolemia significantly increased myocardial cAMP content ( P < 0.01).
A Negative Correlation was Observed Between Myocardial Contractile Function and DPH Fluorescence Polarization, and a Positive Correlation was Observed Between the Size of the Cardiac Infarct and DPH Fluorescence Polarization
To determine the direct relation between membrane fluidity and myocardial function or cardiac injury, correlation between DPH fluorescence polarization and LVSP, +dp/dt max , −dp/dt max , and infarct size were analyzed. LVSP, +dp/dt max , and −dp/dt max were all found to be inversely correlated with DPH fluorescence polarization ( r = −0.191, P < 0.05; r = −0.323, P < 0.01; r = −0.322, P < 0.01, respectively; Fig. 3 a, b, c). The size of the cardiac infarct was found to be directly correlated with DPH fluorescence polarization ( r = 0.599, P < 0.01, Fig. 3 d). In other words, membrane fluidity was directly correlated with myocardial contractile function and inversely correlated with the size of the cardiac infarct. These results suggest that hypercholesterolemia-induced cardiac impairment may be associated with decreased membrane fluidity and that PIO treatment reverses hypercholesterolemia-induced myocardial dysfunction by preserving membrane fluidity. Fig. 3 Correlation of DPH fluorescence polarization of cardiac cell membrane, the baseline of cardiac function (LVSP, +dp/dt max , and −dp/dt tmax ), and size of the myocardial infarct in three groups subjected to myocardial ischemia and reperfusion (linear correlation analysis). There were significant inverse correlations between myocardial contractile function and DPH fluorescence polarization ( a LVSP: r = −0.191, P < 0.05, n = 21; b +dp/dt max : r = −0.323, P < 0.01, n = 22; c −dp/d tmax : r = −0.322, P < 0.01, n = 21, respectively). There was a significant direct correlation between cardiac infarct size and DPH fluorescence polarization ( d r = 0.599, P < 0.01, n = 20)
Discussion
The present results indicated the following: (1) Hypercholesterolemia impaired cardiac function and increased the size of the myocardial infarct after ischemia/reperfusion, suggesting that hypercholesterolemia may enhance cardiac vulnerability. (2) Hypercholesterolemia increased C/P ratio in the myocardial cell membrane but decreased membrane fluidity, Na + –K + -ATPase activity, and myocardial cAMP content, and membrane fluidity was positively correlated with myocardial contractile function and negatively correlated with the size of the cardiac infarct, suggesting that hypercholesterolemia may exacerbate cardiac injury by decreasing membrane fluidity and inducing myocardial dysfunction. (3) PIO treatment markedly inhibited hypercholesterolemia-induced increases in C/P ratio, and decreases in membrane fluidity, and myocardial cAMP content of the cardiac myocyte membrane, so restoring cardiac function and decreasing the size of the infarct after myocardial ischemia/reperfusion. These findings may suggest that hypercholesterolemia partially blocked the ion channels and membrane receptor downstream signaling by reducing membrane fluidity, ultimately leading to cardiomyocyte dysfunction. In addition, PPARγ agonists such as PIO may have a broad spectrum of cardiovascular protective effects in addition to its reported beneficial effects in diabetes, and the protective effects may be partly attributable to protection of myocardial membrane fluidity.
Hypercholesterolemia has long been recognized as a major risk factor for coronary artery disease and MI [ ]. However, the majority of previous reports focused on the effects of hypercholesterolemia on endothelial function, vascular injury, and development of atherosclerosis [ , ]. Moreover, hypercholesterolemia markedly increases MI/reperfusion injury as evidenced by an increase in apoptotic and necrotic cell death and infarct size [ , ]. The present study confirmed the findings of these reports and demonstrated that hypercholesterolemia decreased cardiac function and increased infarct size, suggesting that hypercholesterolemia may increase susceptibility to cardiac injury, but the mechanism is still unclear.
Membrane fluidity is an important and dynamic characteristic of the membrane lipid bilayer. Stable membrane fluidity is essential to maintaining the intracellular environment and specific cell functions and properties such as Na + –K + -ATPase activity and cAMP content, and changes in membrane fluidity may affect the initiation and development of many diseases. In present study, membrane DPH fluorescence polarization was found to be significantly increased, which indicated a decrease in membrane fluidity because of hypercholesterolemia. Other studies have reported that membrane fluidity is involved in the regulation of platelet function [ ]. For example, increased platelet membrane fluidity was found to induce platelet aggregation/agglutination, which is one of the pathological bases of coronary heart disease. The present study demonstrated that hypercholesterolemia markedly decreased cardiomyocyte membrane fluidity; it can be deduced that the decrease in cardiomyocyte membrane fluidity also contributed to the increase in susceptibility to cardiac injury.
Many factors may influence membrane fluidity, such as membrane lipid composition, membrane protein, and metal ions. The C/P ratio of cell membrane is the most important determinant of membrane fluidity. Increases in C/P ratio may cause membrane fluidity to decrease, and vice versa [ ]. Most membrane lipids can be produced through either of two pathways, intracellular synthesis and extracellular exchange, but erythrocytes and platelets are solely dependent on extracellular exchange for lipids. In this way, changes in plasma lipid content have very important effects on membrane lipid composition. The present experiment demonstrated that a change in cardiac cell membrane fluidity was partially caused by dyslipidemia, as evidenced by increases in the concentration of plasma cholesterol and cardiac membrane C/P ratio and decreases in cardiac membrane fluidity. In this way, lipid-lowering therapy may improve the membrane fluidity of myocardial cells and thus improve cell function effectively.
The current study demonstrated that the Na + –K + -ATPase activity of myocardial cell membrane and cAMP content were markedly lower in hypercholesterolemic rats. Na + –K + -ATPase is a characteristic membrane enzyme, and it plays a significant role in maintaining the stability and function of the intracellular environment, and it is an indicator of successful membrane extraction. Some drugs (such as ethanol) and diseases (such as systemic lupus erythematosus and sickle cell anemia) alter membrane protein function and membrane fluidity. This is associated with decreased Na + –K + -ATPase activity. Several studies have considered that membrane fluidity may be positively correlated with Na + –K + -ATPase activity [ ], and modulation of membrane fluidity is important for ion channels activity [ ]. As the second messenger, cAMP is produced after the combination of extracellular signal elements and membrane receptors; the change in its expression reflects the function of receptors; while the function of receptors is affected by membrane fluidity, therefore, the amount of cAMP in cardiac myocyte was used to indirectly reflect the influence of membrane fluidity on myocardial cell function [ ]. The present study showed cAMP content to be lower in the HC diet group, indicating that the signal transduction pathway of the membrane receptor had been disrupted. Then cell dysfunction was observed. Altered membrane fluidity may affect the functionality of membrane receptors and affect cellular signal transduction, leading to cell dysfunction. These results suggest that hypercholesterolemia may affect cardiac cell function and increase susceptibility to myocardial injury by reducing the fluidity of the cardiac cell membrane, Na + –K + -ATPase activity, and membrane receptor activation and by destroying homeostasis and changing signal transduction.
The present study also showed that in vivo administration of PIO, a PPARγ agonist, decreased hypercholesterolemia-induced high plasma lipids level, reduced membrane C/P ratio in myocardial cells, increased membrane fluidity and cAMP content of myocardial cells, improved cardiac function, and decreased the size of infarcts in ischemic/reperfused hearts. Research confirmed that PIO has multiple effects on cardiomyocyte. The adiponectin secretion stimulated by PIO via activation of AMPK pathway could attenuate left ventricular hypertrophy, fibrosis, and diastolic dysfunction in DS/obese rats [ ]. PIO attenuates myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury via iNOS independent or partly dependent on eNOS [ ] and upregulation of ERK and COX-2 [ ]. PIO promotes cardiac protective effects by inhibiting the immunoglobulin deposition on diabetic myocardium [ ]. Inhibition of advanced glycation end products by PIO alleviates accumulation of dendritic cells and improves heart function [ ]. Pretreatment with PIO promotes transdifferentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells to cardiomyocytes and improves cardiac function [ ]. In addition, previous studies have demonstrated that PPARγ agonists can improve cardiovascular function in diabetic patients and diabetic animal models [ ], alleviate cardiomyocyte injury after ischemia/reperfusion in hypercholesterolemic rabbits [ ], and restore the plasma lipid levels in patients with dyslipidemia and type 2 diabetes [ ]. However, a growing body of evidence strongly suggests that PPARγ agonists may play a cardioprotective role through several mechanisms in hypercholesterolemia. The current study suggests that PIO may attenuate susceptibility to hypercholesterolemia-induced myocardial injury, improve myocardial cell function, and restore the fluidity of the myocardial cell membrane by decreasing plasma lipid levels and improving C/P ratio of the myocardial cell membrane. Specifically, the PPARγ agonists may exert their cardioprotective effect in hypercholesterolemia by improving the fluidity of the myocardial cell membrane.
In summary, it was here demonstrated that hypercholesterolemia, a well-recognized risk factor for ischemic hearts, causes a significant decrease in myocardial cell membrane fluidity, a pathological basis of coronary heart disease. Treatment with PIO, a drug currently used in the treatment of type-2 diabetes, markedly increased hypercholesterolemia-induced fluidity of myocardial cell membranes and significantly reduced susceptibility to myocardial injury. These results may suggest that PPARγ agonists might be a suitable choice for therapy for patients with ischemic heart disease who have multiple risk factors such as hypercholesterolemia and diabetes. In other words, the PPARγ agonists may have broad applications in treatment of cardiovascular diseases, in addition to their current application in treatment of type 2 diabetes. In addition, it is now recognized that hypercholesterolemia-induced myocardial injury has multiple aspects and the cardioprotective effects of PPARγ agonists have multiple mechanisms. The present study only demonstrated that hypercholesterolemia caused increases in susceptibility to myocardial injury through increases in plasma lipid levels and the subsequent decreases in myocardial cell membrane fluidity. Other pro-injury factors involved in this pathological scenario remain unknown, and this should be directly addressed in future studies.