Introduction
Endothelial cells form a ‘biologically significant interphase’ between the blood and underlying tissue and respond to different microenvironments in various tissue types [ , ]. Endothelial cells have remarkable heterogeneity with respect to both structure and function depending on their location in the body. This helps them to perform specialized functions in different parts of the body such as brain, kidney, liver, digestive tract, and heart.
Heart has two different types of endothelial cells influencing its function. They are endocardial endothelial (EEC) cells and the microvascular endothelial cells (MVEC). Both are involved in modulation of myocardial performance through autocrine and paracrine mediators [ , , , , , ]. Endocardial endothelial cells occupy a unique position in the heart as it lines the inner surface of the heart chambers. They are structurally and functionally dissimilar from endothelial cells of arteries and veins [ ]. Endocardial endothelial cells are continuously exposed to the flowing blood in the heart and thus serve as a sensor of signals such as pressure, shear stress, vasoactive substances, inflammatory molecules, and oxidizing and antioxidizing agents [ ]. Thus, despite being a single layer of cells and quantitatively less in number compared with MVECs, endocardial endothelium act as a ‘blood–heart barrier’ and has an important role in maintaining the homeostatic balance and normal functioning of heart.
ATP-binding cassette transporters play a pivotal role in the protective mechanism of cells by preventing the accumulation of both extracellular and intracellular toxic substances. ATP-binding cassette transporter (ABC transporter) subfamily G member 2 (ABCG2) is well recognized not only to confer the cells with multi-drug resistance but also to be involved in the transport of specific substrates across the cell membrane, their metabolism, distribution, and toxic effects [ , ]. Several studies have demonstrated the importance of high level of ABCG2 expression in maintaining the cell homeostasis such as efflux of amyloid beta in blood-brain barrier [ ], regulating intracellular heme and porphyrin levels [ , , ], efflux of reduced glutathione to extracellular space [ ], and elimination of toxic agents including anticancer agents [ , ]. Besides, ABCG2 expressed in microvascular endothelial cells in the heart significantly influence angiogenesis and antioxidant response in experimental myocardial infarction and pressure overload cardiac hypertrophy [ ].
We have earlier reported that EECs, compared to endothelial cells of arteries and veins, are relatively resistant to apoptosis induced by anticancer agents [ ]. There have been no earlier studies regarding the existence of ABC transporter molecules in endocardial endothelial cells and their significance in the endocardial endothelial cell survival and maintenance and also in endocardial endothelial-myocyte cross talk. Here, we present evidences that, the relative resistance of EECs against apoptosis is related to higher endogenous levels of ABCG2, an ATP-binding cassette transporter in EECs.
Materials and Methods
Source of Cells
All experiments were conducted on immortalized porcine endocardial endothelial cell lines (hTERT PEECs) and primary culture of endothelial cells from porcine endocardium (PEEC), porcine left atrioventricular valve (PVEC) and porcine aorta (PAEC). Human umbilical vein endothelial cell lines (EA.hy926) were also used. Primary cultures at first passage were used for the experiments. hTERT PEEC [ ] and EA.hy926 (gifted by Prof. Edgell, Pathology Department, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA) were obtained from the central cell repository, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Kerala, India. PEECs, PAECs, and PVECs were isolated by enzymatic method using 0.2 % collagenase type-2 (C6885, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in MCDB 131 (M8537, Sigma-Aldrich, USA). The study was approved by the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee (IAEC).
Isolation of Primary Cultures of Endothelial Cells
Porcine hearts along with aorta were acquired from the abattoirs and were transported in phosphate-buffered saline containing antibiotic–antimycotic cocktail (15240, Gibco Life Technologies, USA) and heparin (H3149, Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Endothelial cells were isolated within 2 h of receiving the sample.
Endocardial endothelial cells (PEECs) were isolated by the method described by Smith et al. [ ]. Briefly, the left ventricle (devoid of valves, chordae tendinae, and other debris) was filled with 0.2 % collagenase type-2 in MCDB 13. After an incubation period of 30 min at room temperature, inside of the ventricle was rubbed gently with a cell scraper to remove loosely attached PEECs. After centrifugation, the cell pellets were re-suspended and cultured in MCDB 131 with 20 % FBS (10270, Gibco Life Technologies, USA) at 37 °C, 5 % CO 2 and 95 % O 2 .
Aortic endothelial cells (PAECs) were isolated by the method described by Ando et al. [ ] with modifications. PAECs were isolated by scraping the internal surface of the aorta and incubating with 0.2 % collagenase type 2 in MCDB 131 for 20 min at room temperature. Cells were cultured in MCDB 131 with 20 % FBS at 37 °C, 5 % CO 2 and 95 % O 2 .
Left atrioventricular valve endothelial cells (PVECs) were isolated by the method described by Gould and Butcher [ ]. Briefly, valve tissue was carefully separated from the left ventricle and then digested with 0.2 % collagenase type-2 in MCDB 131. Surface cells from the valve were dislodged by gentle scrapping. After centrifugation, the cell pellets were re-suspended and cultured in MCDB 131 with 20 % FBS at 37 °C, 5 % CO 2 and 95 % O 2 .
Assessment of Expression Level of Major ABC Transporters in Endothelial Cells
FACS Analysis
Activity of P-glycoprotein, MRP1, and ABCG2 in cultured endothelial cells was assessed by FACS using fluorescent substrates and inhibitors specific to the transporters. For assessing the activity of P-glycoprotein, Rhodamine 123 (555505, Calbiochem, Merck Millipore, Germany; 2 µg/ml) and verapmil (V4629, Sigma-Aldrich, USA; 50 µM) were used as fluorescent substrate and specific inhibitor, respectively. For assessing MRP1 activity, calcein AM (sc203865, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA; 1 mM) and Probenecid (sc202773, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA; 1 mM) were used, and for ABCG2 activity, Pheophorbide-A (PhA) (sc264070, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA; 10 µM) and fumitremorgin C (F9054, Sigma-Aldrich, USA; 10 µM) were used as fluorescent substrate and specific inhibitors, respectively.
The cells were cultured to 80 % confluency in 12-well cell culture plates ( N = 6 wells for each treatment per experiment for each cell types such as hTERT PEEC, EAhy.926, PEEC, PAEC, and PVEC). Assay was conducted in four experiment groups in triplicates namely (1) cells without treatment of any of the fluorescent probes or inhibitors, (2) cells incubated with fluorescent substrate for 30 min and without efflux time, (3) cells incubated with fluorescent substrate for 30 min and an efflux time of 45 min, and (4) cells incubated with fluorescent substrate and specific inhibitors for 30 min and an efflux time of 45 min. After the stipulated incubation time, cells were trypsinized and transferred into polystyrene round-bottom tubes (14-959-2A, Falcon, USA). The cells were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min and resuspended in cold phosphate-buffered saline and filtered through 40-μm cell strainer (352340, BD Falcon, USA). Samples were analyzed on a flow cytometer (BD, San Jose, USA). Rhodamine 123 and calcein fluorescence were detected with a 488-nm argon laser and a 530-nm band-pass filter. PhA fluorescence was measured with a 488-nm argon laser and 670-nm band-pass filter. Dead cells were excluded, based on propidium iodide staining. In each analysis 10,000 numbers of events were recorded, and the data were analyzed by Diva software (BD, San Jose, USA).
Immunoblot Analysis
Endothelial cells were homogenized in a lysis buffer (PBS containing 1 % Nonidet P-40, 1 % Triton X-100, 137 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris–HCl, 20 mM NaF, 1 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and sodium orthovanadate) with a protease inhibitor cocktail (P8340, Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Protein samples (60 μg) were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (RPN203E, Hybond-C extra; Amersham biosciences, UK). The membrane was incubated with anti-ABCG2 antibody (4477, cell signaling technology, USA), anti-MRP-1 antibody (ab63987, Abcam, England), anti-P-glycoprotein antibody (ab3366, Abcam, England), and also anti-GAPDH antibody (internal control; ab9484, Abcam, England) at 1:1000 dilution at 4 °C overnight. Incubation was followed by treatment with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody at 1:10,000 dilution for 1 h at 37 °C. Enhanced chemiluminescence system (RPN2132, ECL Plus; GE Healthcare, UK) was used for detection of protein bands. Signal intensity was normalized to GAPDH expression ( N = 6 wells for each treatment per experiment for each cell types such as hTERT PEEC, EAhy.926, PEEC, PAEC, and PVEC).
Functional Evaluation of ABCG2 Transporters in Endocardial Endothelial Cells with Respect to Resistance Against Apoptosis
We chose to study the anti-apoptotic effect of ABCG2 transporters in endothelial cells by utilising the anticancer agents, doxorubicin and camptothecin, through chromatin condensation assay and immunoblot analysis. These anticancer agents were selected because they have different mechanisms for induction of ROS and apoptosis in cells. Doxorubicin is a topoisomerase-2 inhibitor and generates ROS by utilizing mitochondrial respiratory chain and also by a non-enzymatic method utilizing iron [ , ], while camptothecin is a topoisomerase-1 inhibitor [ ] and creates ROS by hyperpolarization of the mitochondrial membrane potential [ ]. Endothelial cells were grown up to 80 % confluency ( N = 6 wells for each treatment per experiment for each cell types such as hTERT PEEC, EAhy.926, PEEC, PAEC and PVEC) in 12-well cell culture plates and treated with doxorubicin (44583, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and camptothecin (C9911, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) at a final concentration of 1 µM (Standardized as per previous experiments) with presence and absence of 10 μmol/L fumitremorgin C (specific inhibitor of ABCG2).
Chromatin Condensation Assay
Twenty-four hours after the treatment, control and treated cells cell in culture plates were stained with 1 µg/ml of Hoechst 33342 (B2261, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) for 5 min and observed under a fluorescent microscope (TE 2000 E, Nikon, Japan). The intensity of apoptosis in different endothelial cells was determined by assessing the extent of chromatin condensation, which was done by counting the cells with condensed nuclei.
Immunoblot Analysis
Twenty-four hours after the treatment, protein isolation from control and treated cells cell in culture plates and immunoblot assay procedures were carried out as explained previously. The membrane was incubated with anti-caspase-3 antibody (9662, cell signaling technology, USA & L-18, Santa Cruz Inc., USA) and also with anti-GAPDH antibody (internal control; ab9484, abcam, England) at 1:1000 dilution at 4 °C overnight.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed by student t test using OpenEpi software. Data expressed as mean ± standard error (SE).
Results
Endocardial Endothelial Cells have Inherently High Expression of ABCG2
FACS analysis of immortalized hTERT PEEC and human umbilical vein endothelial cell line (EA.hy926) using specific fluorescent probes for the ABC transporters P-glycoprotein, MRP-1, and ABCG2 revealed that there is significantly high efflux of rhodamine 123 and pheophorbide-A (94.6 and 88.6 %, respectively) in hTERT PEEC compared to that in EA.hy926 (1.7 and 0.1 %, respectively). This efflux activity was inhibited when FTC (inhibitor of ABCG2) was used along with the fluorescent substrate, pheophorbide-A. This observation emphasized a high activity of ABCG2 in hTERT PEEC (Fig. 1 ). Then we conducted the same experiment on primary cultures of endothelial cells. Here we have selected the primary cultures of PEECs, porcine aortic endothelial cells (PAECs), and porcine left atrioventricular valve endothelial cells (PVECs). The results revealed a high efflux of pheophorbide-A in PEEC only (86 %), which was inhibited in presence of FTC. No such efflux activity was observed in case of rhodamine 123 (Fig. 2 ). This indicated a higher activity of only ABCG2 in primary cultures of endocardial endothelial cells. No significant efflux of calcein AM, a specific fluorescent substrate of MRP-1, was noticed in all types of endothelial cells including both immortalized and primary cultures. To verify this observation, we performed immunoblot analysis in endothelial cells to find out the level of expression of these ABC transporter proteins. The results revealed an inherently high level of expression of ABCG2 only in endocardial endothelial cells in both immortalized and primary cultures (Fig. 3 ). A high P-glycoprotein expression was not observed as indicated by FACS assay. Fig. 1 FACS analysis of immortalized porcine endocardial endothelial cells (hTERT PEEC) and human umbilical vein endothelial cell line (EA.hy926) for detecting the expression levels of a P-glycoprotein, b MRP-1, and c ABCG2. A significantly higher efflux activity of P-gp and ABCG2 was observed in hTERT PEEC (94.6 and 88.6 %) than that in EA.hy 926 (1.7 and 0.1 %; N = 6 wells for each treatment per experiment for each cell types) Fig. 2 FACS analysis of primary isolates of porcine endocardial endothelial cells (PEECs), porcine aortic endothelial cells (PAECs), and porcine left atrioventricular valve endothelial cells (PVECs) for detecting the expression levels of P-glycoprotein ( a ), MRP-1 ( b ) and ABCG2 ( c ). A significantly higher efflux activity of ABCG2 was observed in h PEECs (86 %) than that in PAECs and PVECs; N = 6 wells for each treatment per experiment for each cell types Fig. 3 Immunoblot analysis for detecting the expression levels of ABCG2 in a EA.hy 926 and hTERT PEEC and b primary cultures of PEEC, PAEC, and PVEC. An inherently higher level of expression of ABCG2 was observed in hTERT PEEC and primary culture of PEEC than that in EA.hy 926, PAEC, and PVEC; asterisk represents P value < 0.01 between the two different cell lines—hTERT PEEC and EA.hy 926 and P value < 0.01 when PEEC compared with PAEC and PVEC
Endocardial Endothelial Cells Possess Relatively Higher Resistance to Apoptosis, Which is Mediated Through Functionally Active ABCG2
To delineate the functional significance of high expression of ABCG2 in endocardial endothelial cells, we performed chromatin condensation assay using Hoechst 33342 staining and immunoblot analysis for caspase-3 activity. Percentage of chromatin condensation in EA.hy 926 cells was 86 and 79 %, respectively, when treated with doxorubicin and camptothecin at 1 µM concentration for 24 h. When the ABCG2 blocker FTC is treated along with the anticancer agents, no significant change in chromatin condensation percentage was observed (88 and 82 %, respectively). PAECs and PVECs also had high percentage of chromatin condensation after treatment with doxorubicin and camptothecin irrespective of the presence or absence of ABCG2 inhibitor, FTC. In PAECs, percentage of chromatin condensation was 60 and 58 % in the absence of FTC and 70 and 66 % in the presence of FTC with doxorubicin and camptothecin treatment, respectively. In PVECs, percentage of chromatin condensation was 72 and 61 % in the absence of FTC and 74 and 66 % in the presence of FTC with doxorubicin and camptothecin treatment, respectively. On the contrary, endocardial endothelial cells (both immortalized and primary isolates) were resistant to doxorubicin and camptothecin treatment having less number of cells with condensed chromatin (20 and 15 % in hTERT PEECs and 28 and 20 % in PEECs with doxorubicin and camptothecin treatment, respectively). But when the ABCG2 inhibitor, FTC, is treated along with the anticancer agents for 24 h, the endocardial endothelial cells also succumb to increased chromatin condensation percentage (62 and 59 % in hTERT PEECs and 66 and 60 % in PEECs with doxorubicin + FTC and camptothecin + FTC treatment, respectively; Fig. 4 ). To verify this observation, we performed immunoblot analysis in control and treated endothelial cells to find out the level of expression of caspase-3 protein. The results revealed a significantly reduced caspase-3 expression (mother band) on treatment with anticancer agents in all cell types except in endocardial endothelial cells. Both immortalized and primary cultures of endocardial endothelial cells were considerably resistant to caspase cleavage on treatment with anticancer agents. But when the ABCG2 inhibitor, FTC, is treated along with the anticancer, the endocardial endothelial cells also succumb to increased caspase-3 cleavage (reduction in the expression of caspase-3 mother band). This result verifies the relative resistance of endocardial endothelial cells toward apoptosis, which may be mediated through ABCG2 (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 4 Analysis of chromatin condensation using Hoechst 33342 staining: Endothelial cells from different sources were treated with doxorubicin and camptothecin at 1 µM concentration for 24 h. After treatment, cells were assayed for chromatin condensation using Hoechst 33342 (×10). A significantly less percentage of cells with condensed chromatin were seen in endocardial endothelial cells (hTERT PEEC and PEEC) compared to EA.hy 926, PAEC and PVEC. In presence of the ABCG2 inhibitor, endocardial endothelial cells were also give way to significantly increased number of cells with condensed chromatin ( N = 6 wells for each treatment per experiment for each cell types; asterisk represents P value < 0.01, a significant shift of chromatin condensation in endocardial endothelial cells in presence of ABCG2 inhibitor). Analysis of chromatin condensation using Hoechst 33342 staining in a hTERT PEEC. b EAhy.926. c PEEC. d PAEC. e PVEC Fig. 5 Immunoblot analysis for detecting the expression levels of caspase-3 in a EA.hy 926 b hTERT PEEC, c PEEC, d PAEC, and e PVEC. The results revealed a significantly reduced caspase-3 expression (mother band) on treatment with anticancer agents in all cell types except in endocardial endothelial cells. Both immortalized and primary cultures of endocardial endothelial cells were considerably resistant to caspase cleavage on treatment with anticancer agents. But when the ABCG2 inhibitor, FTC, is treated along with the anticancer, the endocardial endothelial cells also succumb to increased caspase-3 cleavage (reduction in the expression of caspase-3 mother band). Densitometry for the immunoblots was done with Quantity One software; asterisk represents P value < 0.05, a significant shift to apoptosis
Discussion
We had earlier reported that endocardial endothelial cells, compared to endothelial cells of arteries and veins, are relatively resistant to apoptosis-inducing anticancer agents [ ]. In the present study, we addressed the reasons for the heterogeneity among endothelial cells of diverse origin, in their response to apoptosis induced by anticancer agents.
Most of the anticancer agents are reported to be the substrates of mammalian drug efflux transporters of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family. P-glycoprotein (MDR-1), MRP-1, and ABCG2 (BCRP-1) are the most important ABC transporter molecules that are involved in the cell survival mechanism [ , ]. Here we used doxorubicin and camptothecin as the apoptosis-inducing anticancer agents. We selected these chemicals because both are cytotoxic agents and they not only promote ROS production but also inhibit DNA and RNA synthesis. Doxorubicin is an inhibitor of topoisomerase II, and camptothecin is a topoisomerase I inhibitor [ ].
Initially, through FACS analysis employing specific fluorescent substrates and inhibitors for P-glycoprotein (MDR-1), MRP-1, and ABCG2 (BCRP-1), we analyzed the activity of the ABC transporters in various types of endothelial cells. Both primary and immortalized EECs compared to endothelial cells of arteries, veins, or LAV valves had higher activity of ABCG2. Immunoblot analysis confirmed that EECs also had higher ABCG2 expression compared with endothelial cells from other sites.
One observation is that, in hTERT PEECs, high efflux activity of rhodamine 123 (substrate of P-glycoprotein) is also present but not in primary culture of PEECs. Earlier studies have revealed that transformed cell lines tend to express increased levels of drug efflux transporters such as P-glycoprotein [ , ]. Even though the molecular mechanism behind the upregulation of multi-drug-resistant (MDR) genes are poorly understood, PERK-Nrf2 signaling is one of the suggested mechanism for the upregulation of MDR genes in de-differentiated cells [ , ]. Here immortalization of endocardial endothelial cells may bring about the change, and so hTERT PEECs become capable of transporting rhodamine 123 also. But this property is absolutely absent in primary cultures of PEECs.
The next question we addressed was whether the ABCG2 has any cytoprotective role in EECs in conferring resistance against apoptosis. Chromatin condensation assay by Hoechst 33342 staining revealed that percentage of chromatin condensation was significantly low in EECs compared with EAhy.926 cells, PAECs and PVECs. The protective action in EECs was lost when cells were treated with fumitremorgin C, a specific inhibitor of ABCG2. Endocardial endothelial cells resistance to apoptosis is also associated with loss of mitochondrial transmembrane potential, an early and important event in the apoptotic process [ ]. We confirmed our observation by examining the caspase-3 activity by immunoblot analysis. We now demonstrated that functionally active ABCG2 is essential for EEC’s resistance to apoptosis.
A wide range of anticancer agents cause myocardial toxicity, and they result in heart failure [ , ]. Evidences from in vitro and in vivo studies imply that anticancer agents can also cause endothelial cell damage [ , , ], and thus they can indirectly weaken the normal functioning of circulatory system. Two independent experiments by researchers have demonstrated that microvascular endothelial cells in the blood–brain barrier have higher levels of ABCG2 expression [ , ]. They suggested a role for brain endothelial ABCG2 transporter in conferring drug resistance in blood–brain barrier.
Given the above-mentioned role of ABCG2 in cardiac physiology, our observation that ABCG2 expression is inherently high in endocardial endothelial cells and that the high expression of ABCG2 in EECs confer them protection against oxidative stress and apoptosis is of interest. The higher levels of ABCG2 in EECs may be of significance in the survival mechanism of EECs, but also may play a significant role in the regulation of endothelial-myocyte cross talk in the heart. Functional significance of this observation relative to heart’s resistance to toxic effects needs further scrutiny in in vivo models.