Introduction
Doxorubicin, a potent anthracycline antibiotic–chemotherapeutic drug, serves as one of the most frequently used agents in a myriad of malignancies [ ]. Cardiotoxicity is the overriding drawback by which most patients fail to survive even long after the cessation of the drug, leading to degenerative cardiomyopathy and heart failure [ , ]. Doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity occurs in two forms: acute and chronic, which occurs in 11 and 1.7 % of cases, respectively [ ]. Among several mechanisms underlying pathophysiology of cardiomyopathy, generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is the most important risk factor [ ]. Many investigations have tried to find pharmacological signaling pathways involved in pathogenesis and protection of cardiomyocytes against doxorubicin toxicity, but the exact mechanisms are not fully clarified. For instance, endocannabinoid agonists (e.g., anandamide) are shown to prevent acute cardiac injury induced by doxorubicin in rats [ ].
Cannabinoids include psychoactive substances ranging from natural compounds present in Cannabis sativa (like tetrahydrocannabinol) to endogenous ligands (like anandamide) and synthetic compounds (like HU-210 and WIN55212-2) [ ]. As reported before, cannabinoids protect the heart in several pathological conditions such as ischemia/reperfusion injury, myocardial infarction and also doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity [ , , , ]. Cannabinoids bind to two classical receptors (CB 1 and CB 2 ) in mammalian tissues. However, they can interact with other receptors such as vanilloid receptors and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) [ , ].
PPARs are nuclear receptor proteins coupled with retinoid X receptors (RXR) which act as transcription factors to regulate the expression of some genes mostly affecting lipid metabolism and energy balance in cells [ ]. These transcription factors have three subtypes: PPAR-α, PPAR-β/δ and PPAR-γ, which have different expressions in various tissues [ ]. Among these subtypes, PPAR-α is highly expressed in the heart and several researches have been carried out to explore the cardiac effects of PPAR-α agonists [ ]. Recently, Pruimboom-Brees et al. [ ] have reported that the activation of PPAR-α is associated with enhanced cardiac fatty acid oxidation and accumulation of oxidative stress mediators, leading to cardiomyocyte necrosis.
Although PPAR-α agonists have widely been used in clinical medicine, to our knowledge, there is no evidence on the effect of PPAR-α inhibition/activation on cardiotoxicity induced by doxorubicin. For first time, the present study examined the hypothesis indicating the effect of GW6471, a specific PPAR-α antagonist, on acute doxorubicin-induced cardiac dysfunction in mice. Regarding the interaction of cannabinoids with PPAR receptors and their protective effects on doxorubicin cardiotoxicity [ ], we also investigated the effect of WIN55212-2, a non-specific cannabinoid agonist, on PPAR-α activity in cardiac tissue as well as its effect on acute cardiotoxicity induced by doxorubicin in mice.
Methods
Chemicals
GW6471 was purchased from Tocris Inc (UK). WIN55212-2 and doxorubicin hydrochloride were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). Nuclear extraction kit and PPAR-α transcription factor assay kit were purchased from Cayman Inc (USA).
Animals
In this study, male Balb/c mice were used with free access to tap water and food and were kept in a 12-h light/dark cycle in accordance with the Guide for the Use and Care of Laboratory Animals (NIH US publication No. 85-23, revised 1985). In each experimental group, 6–8 mice were used.
Assessment of PPAR-α Activity
In order to quantitatively measure the activity of PPAR-α in cardiac tissue following WIN or doxorubicin administration, cardiac tissues were isolated and PPAR-α activity was measured in the nuclear extracts. In brief, heart samples were excised 1 h after intraperitoneal injection of either doxorubicin (20 mg/kg) or saline [ ]. The specific groups of animals were pretreated with either WIN (3.5 mg/kg) or its vehicle (DMSO 50 % in saline) 30 min prior to doxorubicin or saline administration [ ]. The heart samples were then removed and homogenized in nuclear extraction hypotonic buffer from nuclear extraction kit (Cayman, USA). Nuclear extracts were then utilized to define protein content by Bradford assay. Nuclear extracts were incubated overnight, and after washing steps, activated PPAR-α was measured using specific PPAR-α antibody (PPAR-α primary antibody), followed by horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat immunoglobulin G antibody in an ELISA-based system (PPAR-α ELISA Kit, Biosource, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Ultimately, the samples were spectrophotometrically analyzed at λ = 450 nm, and resulted data were reported based on activity/µg of protein.
Left Atrium Isolation and Treatment
Acute cardiac dysfunction was induced by doxorubicin as described [ ]. In brief, left atrium was spontaneously isolated from Balb/c mice and was incubated with doxorubicin (35 µM in physiological salt solution) for 1 h. This concentration was reported to be suitable for induction of 50 % decrease in atrial contractility following electrical field stimulation [ ]. Also, the atria isolated from animals of the control group were incubated with physiological saline solution. To investigate the effect of WIN on doxorubicin-induced cardiac dysfunction, either WIN (3.5 mg/kg) or its vehicle (DMSO 50 % in saline) was injected intraperitoneally 1 h before isolation of atria [ ]. In order to study the role of PPAR-α inhibition, either GW6471 (10 mg/kg) or its vehicle (DMSO 50 % in saline) [ ] was injected intraperitoneally 30 min before pretreatment with either WIN (3.5 mg/kg) or vehicle.
The doses of applied drugs were selected based on pre-experimental pilot studies.
Preparation of Isolated Left Atria and In Vitro Study
Beating left atria were isolated in order to study atria contractility in response to electrical field stimulation. In brief, the atria were isolated in cold oxygenated physiological salt solution and were suspended under isometric tension of 0.5 g in a 20-ml organ bath glass chamber (temperature 37.0 ± 0.1 °C, pH = 7.4) [ ]. The perfusion medium was physiological salt solution (PSS, in mM) with following composition: NaCl, 112; KCl, 5; CaCl 2 , 1.8; MgCl 2 , 1; NaH 2 PO 4 , 0.5; KH 2 PO 4 , 0.5; NaHCO 3 , 25; glucose, 10; and EDTA, 0.004, bubbled with a gas mixture of 95 %/5 % O 2 /CO 2 at 37 °C. The left atrium, which does not contain the sinoatrial (SA) node, was utilized for recording the stimulated left atrial beating. A constant voltage stimulator (BioScience, Kent, UK) was employed to produce electrical stimulations in the tissue. The frequency, duration and voltage of electrical field stimulation were 0.5 Hz, 2 ms and 3 % above threshold, respectively. Contractions were recorded using an isometric transducer. The signals were digitized at a sampling rate of 10 kHz and displayed on a PowerLab system (ADInstruments, Australia). Before evaluation of the recorded atrial contractions, an equilibrium period of 30 min was allowed to prevent dissection-evoked artifact [ ].
Measurement of Cardiac Malondialdehyde and TNF-α
Malondialdehyde (MDA), an end-product of lipid peroxidation, was measured in cardiac tissue sampled from the experimental animal groups. Similar to PPAR-α activity assessment, the mice hearts were excised 1 h after doxorubicin/saline administration and were perfused with ice-cold saline to wash out the excess tissue blood. Samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and were kept in −80 °C for further analysis. Tissues were then homogenized in potassium chloride solution (1.15 %) and MDA levels were spectrophotometrically measured at λ = 450 nm, as described by Rahimian et al. [ ].
Cardiac TNF-α levels were measured to evaluate possible cardiac inflammatory response caused by acute doxorubicin with or without prior administration of either WIN55212-2 (3.5 mg/kg) or GW6471 (10 mg/kg). The ELISA kit (R&D Systems Inc, Biosource, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was employed for the measurement of TNF-α in cardiac tissue homogenates, and the samples were spectrophotometrically analyzed at λ = 532 nm [ ].
Statistical Analysis
The results were presented as mean ± SEM. Differences between normally distributed one and two variables were examined using one- and two-way ANOVA, respectively, followed by Newman–Keuls post-test. For two-group comparisons, Student’s t test was applied. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Cardiac PPAR-α Activity
As shown in Fig. 1 , cardiac PPAR-α activity significantly decreased in the mice received either WIN or doxorubicin compared with the mice administered vehicle ( P < 0.05). Moreover, concomitant administration of WIN and doxorubicin caused a significant decrease in cardiac PPAR-α activity in the studied Balb/c mice ( P < 0.001). Fig. 1 Cardiac PPAR-α activity in the animals receiving vehicle (DMSO), WIN, DOX and WIN + DOX. Data are expressed as PPAR-α activity per µg protein and are normalized using the mean value of saline-treated data. * P < 0.05; *** P < 0.001 compared with vehicle (DMSO 50 % in saline)-treated mice
In Vitro Functional Study
As observed in Fig. 2 , a differential of force to time (d F /d t ) was calculated in 5-min period series using PowerLab Chart 7 software (ADI, Australia). Contractility (d F /d t ) was determined in stimulated beating isolated left atria before and after incubation with either physiological salt solution or doxorubicin. Figure 2 a demonstrates a significant typical difference in left atrial beating before and after administration of doxorubicin, which is able to make a significant difference in basal left atrial contractility (Fig. 2 b, P < 0.001). Fig. 2 a A representative graph showing beating left atrium before and after incubation with DOX and b effect of incubation with either DOX or its vehicle on atrial contractility. *** P < 0.001 compared with vehicle (DMSO 50 % in saline)-treated mice
Figure 3 a shows that pretreatment of the animals with GW6471 significantly increased contractility of the isolated left atria following 1-h incubation with doxorubicin in comparison with vehicle-treated groups (75 ± 10 vs. 28 ± 2 % of basal contractility, P < 0.05). We also examined the effect of GW6471 on atrial contractility without incubation with doxorubicin, and we found that GW6471 was unable to make a significant difference in atrial contractility compared with animals receiving vehicle (132 ± 23 vs. 92 ± 12 % of basal contractility, P > 0.05). Moreover, Fig. 3 b demonstrates that administration of WIN 1 h before isolation of left atrium partially protected cardiomyocytes against doxorubicin through significant increase in contractility (46 ± 6 vs. 28 ± 2 % of basal contractility, P < 0.05). Similar to GW6471, pretreatment with WIN showed no significant alteration in atrial contractility in lack of incubation with doxorubicin in comparison with vehicle-treated animals (64 ± 1 vs. 92 ± 12 % of basal contractility, P > 0.05). Fig. 3 a Atrial contractility in either GW6471- or vehicle-treated animals. Isolated atria were incubated with DOX for 60 min before measurement of atrial contractility, b atrial contractility in either WIN- or vehicle-treated animals. Isolated atria were incubated with DOX for 60 min before measurement of atrial contractility and c atrial contractility in the animals receiving GW6471, WIN, GW6471 + WIN and vehicle (DMSO). All isolated atria were incubated with DOX. *** P < 0.001 compared with vehicle (DMSO 50 % in saline)-treated mice; a P < 0.05 compared with DOX-treated mice; αα P < 0.01 compared with vehicle (DMSO 50 % in saline)-treated mice; β P < 0.05 compared with WIN-treated mice
As shown in Fig. 3 c, concomitant administration of WIN with GW6471 increased atrial contractility following incubation with either doxorubicin or physiological salt solution compared with animals receiving vehicle (87 ± 14 % of the basal contractility). As described earlier, WIN or GW6471 could individually ameliorate the decreased contractility induced by acute exposure to doxorubicin in isolated left atria, and the protective effect was exerted following combination therapy with both drugs.
Cardiac Malondialdehyde and TNF-α
Cardiac levels of MDA and TNF-α in all studied groups are shown in Fig. 4 a, b, respectively. The results showed a significant increase in tissue MDA and TNF-α levels in the mice receiving doxorubicin compared with the animals receiving vehicle ( P < 0.001). Otherwise, administration of either WIN or GW6471 significantly reduced the cardiac MDA and TNF-α levels in the doxorubicin-treated mice ( P < 0.001). Fig. 4 a Cardiac MDA level in the experimental groups 60 min after administration of vehicle (DMSO), DOX, WIN and GW6471 and b cardiac TNF-α level in the experimental groups 60 min after treatment with (DMSO), DOX, WIN and GW6471. *** P < 0.001 compared with vehicle (DMSO 50 % in saline)-treated mice; a P < 0.001 compared with DMSO/DOX-treated mice
Discussion
To our knowledge, hundreds of researches have been carried out on the cardiotoxicity caused by doxorubicin and some of them have focused on the cardiac effects of cannabinoids. It is shown that anandamide, an endogenous cannabinoid, protects the heart in an acute model of doxorubicin-induced cardiac injury [ ], but the mechanisms underlying its cardioprotection are not well understood. On the other hand, PPAR-α activation contributes to cardiac necrosis in mice [ ], and cannabinoids are associated with modulation of PPAR activity in this paradigm [ ].
In this investigation, we employed a previously established model to study doxorubicin-induced cardiac dysfunction in mice [ ] and showed that contractility decreased in the isolated left atrium model in the presence of doxorubicin. This reduction in contractility significantly confirmed the validity of this in vitro model and was consistent with the results concluded from Mitra et al. reports [ , ]. Moreover, there are evidences that the redox imbalance induced by doxorubicin is responsible for the induction of mitochondrial permeability and subsequent increase in calcium ion influx across the cellular membrane in the later phase of action potential. This condition is considered as a mechanism for doxorubicin-induced cardiac dysfunction, leading to decreased cardiac contractility [ ]. On the other hand, there have been no data on the effect of PPAR-α inhibition on doxorubicin-induced cardiac injury. For the first time, the present study was performed to evaluate PPAR-α activity following WIN55212-2 administration and demonstrated that the compound could exert the cardioprotective effect via inhibition of cardiac PPAR-α activity in the studied Balb/c mice. As mentioned in several evidences, WIN is a non-specific cannabinoid agonist which can activate classical cannabinoid receptors (CB 1 /CB 2 ) and also inhibit cardiac PPAR-α activity. It is known that activation of CB 1 leads to increased cardiac contractility and defects of cannabinoid receptors are considered as a pathophysiological factor in cardiac dysfunction [ ]. Moreover, our investigation demonstrated that both a selective PPAR-α inhibitor, GW6471, and a non-selective cannabinoid receptors agonist, WIN55212-2, can protect myocytes against acute cardiac injury caused by doxorubicin. We showed that WIN55212-2 reduces the PPAR-α activity and when combined with GW6471 could increase the cardiac contractility compared to administration of these drugs alone. Therefore, PPAR-α blockade can be described as a possible mechanism underlying the protective effect of cannabinoids in doxorubicin-induced cardiac dysfunction. Also, PPAR-α activation is introduced as a possible mechanism underlying impaired contractility and cardiotoxicity caused by doxorubicin treatment.
The cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin seems to be a complex and multifactorial process including oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and alteration in cardiac gene expression, thus promoting cardiomyocyte apoptosis/necrosis. Guo et al. [ ] have reported that doxorubicin inhibits the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator-1α (PGC-1α), which plays an essential role in regulating the mitochondrial biogenesis, and mitochondrial transcription factor A, a downstream target of PGC-1α. This results in an enhanced production of mitochondrial superoxide in cardiomyocytes, leading to impaired mitochondrial biogenesis [ ]. In this condition, pro-inflammatory cytokines like TNF-α and MDA, an end-product and indicator of lipid peroxidation, will be increased [ , ]. The present investigation indicated that the cardioprotection of WIN55212-2 and GW6471 was further confirmed by decrease in tissue TNF-α and MDA levels, suggesting that pretreatment with WIN or GW6471 in doxorubicin-receiving animals is able to reduce the levels of the two biomarkers. Consequently, these findings implied that PPAR-α can be a possible pharmacologic target for prevention of cardiac injury following exposure to doxorubicin.
To rule out the possible involvement of PPAR-α activation in cardiac dysfunction induced by doxorubicin and the cardioprotection following PPAR-α blockade, we observed that PPAR-α receptor agonists such as fibrates may provide cardiac risk factors by PPAR-α activation [ ]. However, the exact impacts of PPAR-α activation on different cardiac pathways are not fully recognized. Recent evidences indicated that activation of PPAR-α leads to increased cardiac fatty acid oxidation and subsequent accumulation of oxidative stress intermediates, resulting in cardiomyocyte necrosis [ ]. Furthermore, proteomics studies have shown that PPAR-α activation is associated with global changes in cardiac protein expression in rats [ ].
Our investigation showed that pretreatment with WIN is associated with significant improvement in atrial contractility in doxorubicin-treated atria. In conclusion, this study suggests a possible involvement of PPAR-α activation in doxorubicin cardiotoxicity, a role of PPAR-α inhibition in the protection against doxorubicin-induced acute cardiotoxicity in mice and an interaction between PPAR-α and CB 1 /CB 2 receptors in doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Therefore, PPAR-α can be considered as a possible target to prevent cardiac injury due to doxorubicin that can be attenuated following administration of either cannabinoids or PPAR-α inhibitors.