Introduction
Sunitinib (Sutent, SU11248; Pfizer) is a multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). To date, more than 50 kinase targets of sunitinib have been discovered [ ]. Clinically, sunitinib is considered as the first-line and second-line drug for the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma and advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors, respectively [ ]. Unfortunately, unwanted varying degree of cardiac dysfunction including congestive heart failure and hypertension is observed in up to 21–47 % of patients during sunitinib treatment [ , ]. These unwanted side effects might be due to the non-specific inhibition of sunitinib on off target(s). However, the exact target(s) leading to sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity remain unclear [ ]. Therefore, it is urgent and important to clarify the molecular targets(s) of the cardiotoxicity induced by sunitinib, because such knowledge may allow further chemical modification of sunitinib, and the development of new generation of anticancer drugs with few cardiotoxic effects.
Zebrafish ( Danio rerio ) have similar early cardiac development to humans [ ]. In addition, the zebrafish embryos are optically transparent, which allows real-time imaging in vivo. Previous validation study on zebrafish cardiotoxicity assays showed that zebrafish embryos can survive for several days even in the presence of circulatory system defects [ ]. In addition, it was reported that TKIs are conserved expressed in early embryonic zebrafish [ ]. These advantages and characters make zebrafish a good animal model for studying cardiotoxicity, especially for identifying the target(s) leading to TKI-induced cardiotoxicity [ ].
Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), also known as basic FGF, is a member of the fibroblast growth factor family [ ]. FGF2 is expressed in all developmental stages of the heart and confers cardioprotection against myocardial ischemia [ ]. Moreover, the inhibition of FGF receptor 1 (FGFR1), a main target receptor of FGF2, abolished FGF2-induced cardioprotection, suggesting that FGF2 produced cardioprotection mainly via activating FGFR1 [ ]. The phospholipase C (PLC)-γ/c-Raf/cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) pathway, a downstream pathway of FGF2/FGFR1 signaling, was reported to mediate FGF2-induced cardioprotection [ ]. Recently, a competitive binding assay has demonstrated that sunitinib directly inhibits FGF1, indicating that inhibition of FGF2/FGFR1 might be involved in sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity [ ].
In the present study, we showed that FGF2 prevented sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity without compromising its antitumor activity, possibly through the activation of the PLC-γ/c-Raf/CREB pathway and stimulating FGFR1 in zebrafish and cardiomyoblast H9c2 cells.
Materials and Methods
Materials and Reagents
Sunitinib malate (PZ0012) and MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Human low molecular weight FGF2 (17.2 kDa protein containing 154 amino acid residues) was purchased from Chemicon (Temecula, CA, USA). Fetal bovine serum (FBS) and DMEM were purchased from Gibco/Life Technologies (Burlington, ON, Canada).
Zebrafish Lines and Embryos
For the assessment of cardiotoxicity, we used the Tg ( cmlc2 :GFP) transgenic line, which specifically expressed GFP in myocardial cells [ ]. Ethical approval for the animal experiments was granted by the Animal Research Ethics Committee, University of Macau. Zebrafish were maintained in our laboratory as described in the Zebrafish Handbook [ ].
FGF2 mRNA Preparation, Injection and Sunitinib Exposure
Zebrafish FGF2 open reading frame was obtained by RT-PCR and cloned into the pCS2+ vector. The construct was linearized with NotI and transcribed with the mMessage mMachine SP6 Kit (Ambion Inc., Austin, TX) to produce capped FGF2 mRNA (GenBank Accession number 212823.2), which was purified with the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. This FGF2 mRNA can produce low molecular weight FGF2 (molecular weight: 17.1 kDa), as calculated by a computer program (Expasy Server, University of Geneva). Approximately 300–500 pg FGF2 mRNA was injected into one- to two-cell stage zebrafish embryos as described previously [ ]. Healthy zebrafish embryos were distributed into a 12-well microplate with ten embryos in each well. Sunitinib (2 μM) was then added to the wells. And the plate was incubated at 28 °C containing the embryos at 8 h post-fertilization (hpf) for 12 h. Embryos receiving 0.1 % dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were served as vehicle control and equivalent to no treatment. Each experiment was repeated at least three times, with ten embryos per group.
Measurement of Heart Rate
The heartbeat of embryos at 80 hpf was monitored under a light microscope in a 12-well plate. Heartbeats were recorded for 20 s in 20 embryos per group. The rates in sunitinib-treated embryos were expressed as a percentage relative to that observed in the control groups under identical conditions.
Morphological Observation and SV-BA Distance of Zebrafish
The index of heart looping was quantified by examining the distance between the sinus venosus (SV) and bulbus arteriosus (BA) using previously reported methods [ ]. Briefly, zebrafish embryos were anesthetized and mounted laterally on slides in 3 % methylcellulose. Images were taken under IX81 inverted microscope (Olympus Optical Company Co., Japan) equipped with a DP-70 digital camera and DP controller imaging software (Olympus Optical Company Co., Japan). SV-BA distance and body length were measured using Axiovision 4.2 software on the acquired images. Pericardial edema was defined as any abnormality in the pericardium, such as heart and body wall as previously described [ ].
Cell Culture
Cardiomyoblast H9c2 cells, Caki-1 and OS-RC-2 renal cell carcinoma cells were purchased from American Tissue Type Collection (Manassas, VA, USA). H9c2, Caki-1 and OS-RC-2 cells were grown in DMEM, RPMI 1640 or McCoy’s 5a medium, supplemented with 10 % FBS, 100 U/ml of penicillin and 100 U/ml of streptomycin, respectively, in 75 cm 2 tissue culture flasks. Cells were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified incubator containing 5 % CO 2 . Subculture was performed once the cells reached 70–80 % confluence.
Cell Viability and Cytotoxicity Assays
For the measurement of cell viability, cells were seeded with complete medium in 96-well plates at a density of 5 × 10 3 cells per well for 24 h at 37 °C followed by serum starvation (DMEM supplemented with 0.5 % fetal bovine serum) for 12 h. Sunitinib (10 μM) with or without FGF2 was then added to the cells for another 12 h before the assessment of cell viability using the MTT assay as previously described [ ]. Cytotoxicity was determined by measuring the release of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in the incubation medium. The release of LDH was determined by the cytotoxicity detection kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Absorbance was measured using a microplate reader at 490 nm with 655 nm as a reference wavelength.
Western Blotting Assay
Total proteins extracted from cell lysates were immunoblotted according to a previously described method [ ]. The primary antibodies used in this study were as follows: phospho-PLCγ1, PLCγ1, phospho-c-Raf, c-Raf, phospho-CREB, CREB, β-actin and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit antibodies were bought from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA). Total proteins were separated on polyacrylamide gels and transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane. The membrane was blocked in a blocking buffer (5 % (v/v) bovine serum, 0.1 % (v/v) Tween 20 in 0.1 M PBS, pH 7.4) and incubated with primary antibody for 2 h at room temperature, followed by 1 h exposure to HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody at room temperature. Protein bands were detected using an advanced enhanced ECL system (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire, UK).
Molecular Docking
Molecular docking analyses were performed using the SYBYL software (Tripos Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA) and the programs embedded therein. The three-dimensional crystal structure of the FGFR1 tyrosine kinase domain complexed with SU4984, a selective inhibitor, was retrieved from the protein data bank (PDB code: 1AGW) [ ]. The three-dimensional structure of sunitinib was constructed using standard geometric parameters of SYBYL and then optimized using the Powell method. The Surflex-Dock program, used as an empirically derived scoring function based on the binding affinities of protein–ligand complexes, was employed to perform the docking analysis. As a flexible docking method, Surflex-Dock has been shown to be efficient in treating various receptors [ ]. The active site of the FGFR1 tyrosine kinase domain was defined relative to the coordinates of SU4984. During the simulations, the rotatable bonds of the ligands were defined, whereas the receptor was kept rigid. Standard parameters were used to estimate the binding affinity characterized by the Surflex-Dock scores.
Statistical Analysis
The results are expressed as the mean ± SD. Data were analyzed with one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison tests. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 5.0 (GraphPad software, La Jolla, CA, USA) . p < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. The quantitative data for Western blot represent three independent experiments.
Results
FGF2 Protects Against Sunitinib-Induced Cardiotoxicity in Zebrafish Embryos
It was reported that zebrafish embryos exposed to sunitinib developed a cardiotoxic phenotype and displayed pericardial edema and heart dysfunction [ ]. We examined the hearts of developing embryos, which had been exposed to sunitinib at 8 hpf for 12 h. The distance between the SV and BA of the heart, the incidence of pericardial edema and heart rate were determined. By 80 hpf, we found that sunitinib (2 μM) substantially elevated the BA–SV distance, increased the incidence of pericardial edema and decreased heart rate in zebrafish. These changes could be significantly suppressed by the injection of FGF2 mRNA (300–500 pg) at the one- to two-cell stage ( p < 0.05, n > 6, Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Injection of FGF2 mRNA protects against sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity in zebrafish embryos. a Control: embryos were treated with 0.1 % DMSO at 8 hpf for 12 h. b FGF2: embryos were injected with FGF2 mRNA (300–500 pg) at the one- to two-cell stage. c Su: embryos were exposed to 2 μM sunitinib at 8 hpf for 12 h. d FGF2 + Su: one- to two-cell stage embryos injected with FGF2 mRNA (300–500 pg) followed by treatment with 2 μM sunitinib at 8 hpf for 12 h. a – d Cardiac morphology of zebrafish. Photomicrographs were taken as described in Materials and methods. Scale bar : 250 μm. e – g Statistical analyses of SV–BA distance, percentage of pericardial edema and heart rate of zebrafish in different groups. SV sinus venous, BA basilar artery, Su sunitinib. # p < 0.05 versus sunitinib treatment group ( n > 6)
FGF2 Protects Against Sunitinib-Induced Cardiotoxicity Without Compromising its Antitumor Activity In Vitro
To examine whether FGF2 could block the cardiotoxicity and antitumor activity of sunitinib, we used cardiomyoblast H9c2 cells, Caki-1 renal cell and OS-RC-2 carcinoma cells, respectively. Low molecular weight FGF2 alone at various concentrations (0.3–30 ng/ml) did not increase the cell viability in H9c2 cells (Fig. 2 a). As shown in Fig. 2 b and d, the cell viability of H9c2 cells and Caki-1 cells was significantly decreased by sunitinib (10 μM). Moreover, sunitinib induced cell injury in H9c2 cells also as demonstrated by an increase in LDH release ( p < 0.05, Fig. 2 c). H9c2 cells exposed to sunitinib and FGF2 showed increased cell viability when compared to the sunitinib only group, suggesting that FGF2 significantly protected against sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity. In contrast, FGF2 treatment did not reverse the decreased cell viability caused by sunitinib in Caki-1 cells (Fig. 2 d). In addition, we have confirmed the result (Fig. 2 d) in another renal carcinoma cell line (OS-RC-2) and similar results were obtained (Fig. 2 e). These data collectively suggest that that FGF2 may not reduce the antitumor activity of sunitinib. Fig. 2 FGF2 protects against sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity without compromising its antitumor activity in vitro. Cells were treated with FGF2 at various indicated concentrations in the presence of sunitinib. After 12 h, cell viability and cytotoxicity were determined by MTT and LDH assays, respectively. a FGF2 alone did not increase the viability of H9c2 cells. b FGF2 dose-dependently reversed sunitinib-induced decrease in the viability of H9c2 cells. c FGF2 dose-dependently reversed sunitinib-induced increase in LDH release in H9c2 cells. FGF2 (30 ng/ml) did not affect sunitinib-induced decrease in the viability of Caki-1 ( d ) and OS-RC-2 renal cell carcinoma ( e ) cells. Data are expressed as mean ± SD * p < 0.05 versus control group; # p < 0.05 versus sunitinib treatment group (ANOVA, Tukey’s test)
FGF2 Reversed Sunitinib-Induced Decrease in PLC-γ/c-Raf Protein Levels in H9c2 Cells
We further explored the signaling pathways underlying the cardioprotective effect of FGF2. H9c2 cells were treated with low molecular weight FGF2, sunitinib or the both for various durations. As shown in Fig. 3 a, sunitinib decreased the phosphorylation of PLC-γ in H9c2 cells, which was reversed by 10 μM FGF2 at 1- and 6-h time points ( p < 0.05). Moreover, sunitinib reduced the phosphorylation of c-Raf in H9c2 cells at observed time points, which was also reversed by FGF2 at 6-h time point (Fig. 3 b). In the absence of sunitinib, FGF2 increased the CREB phosphorylation approximately twofold, and this increase was blunted when 10 μM sunitinib was present at 1-h time point ( p < 0.01, Fig. 4 ). Therefore, these data indicated that PLC-γ/c-Raf/CREB pathway might be involved in the prevention of sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity by FGF2. Fig. 3 FGF2 reversed sunitinib-induced decrease of PLC-γ/c-Raf pathway in H9c2 cells. H9c2 cells were treated with 30 ng/ml FGF2, 10 μM sunitinib or the both for various durations as indicated. The expression levels of PLCγ1 and c-Raf were determined by Western blotting ( a and c ). b and d were quantitative analysis of the protein levels of PLCγ1 and c-Raf. Data are expressed as mean ± SD * p < 0.05 versus control group; # p < 0.05 versus FGF2 treatment group at the same time point. & p < 0.05 versus sunitinib treatment group at the same time point. F FGF2, Su sunitinib Fig. 4 FGF2 induced the phosphorylation of CREB in H9c2 cells. H9c2 cells were treated with 30 ng/ml FGF2, 10 μM sunitinib or the both. a Phosphorylated CREB was detected with Western blot at different time points. b Relative quantitative analysis of p-CREB was performed. Data are expressed as mean ± SD * p < 0.05 versus control group; # p < 0.05 versus FGF2 treatment group at the same time point. F FGF2, Su sunitinib
Molecular Docking Simulation Indicates an Interaction Between FGFR1 and Sunitinib
FGFR1, the main receptor of FGF2, was reported to mediate FGF2-induced cardioprotection by activating the PLC-γ pathway [ ]. Moreover, sunitinib was reported to directly inhibit FGFR1 [ ]. To obtain further insight into the mechanisms of the interaction between sunitinib and FGFR1, computational docking was performed. Molecular docking analysis of the low-energy conformation of sunitinib was found to occupy the ATP-binding site of the FGFR1 tyrosine kinase domain (PDB code: 1AGW) with a Surflex-Dock score of 7.73 (Fig. 5 ). The Surflex-Dock score is expressed as −log 10 ( K d ) units to represent binding affinity. The theoretical K d of sunitinib to FGFR1 (0.19 μM) was very close to the experimental value (0.18 μM) [ ]. Moreover, sunitinib may form hydrogen bonds with side chains of Lys482, Leu484, Ala564 and Glu562, respectively, in the ATP-binding sites of the FGFR1 tyrosine kinase domain. Therefore, sunitinib may inhibit FGFR1 autophosphorylation and substrate phosphorylation, resulting in the blockade of FGF2/FGFR1 signaling. Fig. 5 Molecular docking simulation of the interaction between FGFR1 and sunitinib. Low-energy conformation of sunitinib bound to the ATP-binding site of the FGFR1 tyrosine kinase domain generated by molecular docking. The FGFR1 tyrosine kinase domain is displayed in ribbon form. Sunitinib is depicted as a ball-and-stick model showing carbon ( white ), oxygen ( red ) and fluorine ( green ). LP lipophilic potential (Color figure online)
Discussion
The prevention of cardiotoxicity due to therapeutic agents is currently a “hot topic” area of research. Detailed studies concerning the pathophysiological mechanisms of cardiotoxicity by TKIs are still urgently needed. The main targets of sunitinib include VEGFR, PDGFR and FGFR1. We speculated that some of these targets may account for sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity. A recent study showed that cardiotoxicity was not necessarily related to VEGFR inhibition in a rat model [ ]. We have also demonstrated that the mRNA level of PDFGR in the zebrafish embryo hearts was not obviously changed (data not shown). These results indicated that VEGFR and PDFGR inhibition might not account for sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity. Of note, it was demonstrated that imatinib mesylate (Gleevec, formerly STI571), another tyrosine kinase inhibitor, which is not active against FGFR1, did not show significant cardiotoxicity in the clinical setting, suggesting that FGFR1 might be involved in sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity [ ].
In this study, we initially evaluated whether the activation of FGF2/FGFR1 system suppressed sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity. FGF2 exists in high and low molecular weight isoforms in heart, and the different isomerase displayed alternative actions [ ]. Our results showed that zebrafish embryos injected with FGF2 mRNA, producing low molecular weight FGF2, displayed less cardiotoxicity than treated with sunitinib alone. H9c2 cells, derived from the heart of embryonic rat, show electrophysiological characterization of cardiac tissue and have been extensively used to investigate heart function [ , ]. Cell viability of sunitinib-treated H9c2 cells was significantly increased in the presence of FGF2. These results provided preliminary evidence to show that FGF2 inhibition is involved in sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity. These findings on FGF2 are consistent with previous reports that FGF2 overexpression confers cardioprotection in various experimental models both in vitro and in vivo [ , , ]. Moreover, FGF2 reversed sunitinib-decreased phosphorylation of PLC-γ, c-Raf and CREB, suggesting the PLC-γ/c-Raf/CREB pathway might be involved in the prevention of sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity by FGF2. Our preliminary study has also shown that PLC-γ inhibitor abolished the prevention of sunitinib-induced cell death by FGF2 in H9c2 cells (data not shown). These results are consistent with previous studies that this pathway mediates FGF2-induced cardioprotection [ ]. However, it is not clear whether FGF2 impacts the antitumor effect conferred by sunitinib. To shed light on this issue, we further investigated the antitumor activity of sunitinib in the presence of FGF2 in Caki-1 and OS-RC-2 cells. In contrast to the results obtained in H9c2 cells, we found that FGF2 did not reverse sunitinib-induced cell death in Caki-1 and OS-RC-2 renal cell carcinoma cells, indicating that FGF2 may not hamper the antitumor activity of sunitinib.
It is known that sunitinib can potently inhibit the activity of FGFR1 with an IC 50 = 437 nM as determined by an in vitro kinase assay [ ]. Our molecular docking results further demonstrated that sunitinib could directly interact with the FGFR1 tyrosine kinase domain by occupying its ATP-binding sites and may form hydrogen bonds with side chains of Lys482, Leu484, Ala564 and Glu562, respectively, possibly lead to the inhibition of FGF2/FGFR1 signaling. The role(s) of the binding sites between sunitinib and FGFR1 contributing to the cardiotoxic effect would be another interesting issue that is worth clarifying in the future.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that FGF2 inhibition plays an important role in sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity both in vitro and in vivo. This may be important in redesigning sunitinib to produce an agent that is much less potent in inhibiting the activity of FGF2, and produce fewer cardiotoxic effects than sunitinib. Our results further suggested that therapeutic strategies designed to activate FGF2 may be beneficial in alleviating the cardiotoxic effects without hampering the antitumor activity during sunitinib-based chemotherapy.