Introduction
Hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S) intoxication produces a coma associated with a depression in breathing and a profound circulatory failure [ ]. This gas remains a potential source of dreadful intoxication in oil and gas industry [ ] and has more recently used as a method of suicide [ ]. In subjects or animals surviving severe sulfide exposure, various neurological after-effects can occur spanning from minor defects—such as a persistent anosmia—to major cognitive and motor dysfunctions [ ]. These neurological lesions requires the presence of a circulatory shock-induced brain ischemia along with the direct toxicity of H 2 S, as shown for instance by Baldelli et al. [ ].
The mechanisms of the circulatory shock produced during H 2 S intoxication remains, however, poorly understood. Indeed, an increasing number of in vitro studies are supporting the view that H 2 S has vasodilatory properties, akin to the effects of nitric oxide (NO) [ , , ]. In most of these studies, soluble H 2 S at a concentration of 10 μM or above has been shown to produce a potent vasodilation [ , , ]. Since similar blood levels of sulfide are sufficient to produce a terminal apnea in vivo [ , ], these observations suggest that exogenous H 2 S-induced vasodilation is an effect of sulfide toxicity. On the other hand, H 2 S has also been shown to reduce cardiac contractility, at least in vitro, by acting like a calcium channel blocker [ , ]. Since H 2 S-induced circulatory failure seems to be the major determinant of the neurological outcome of patients surviving H 2 S exposure [ ], establishing the mechanisms of H 2 S-induced circulatory failure, i.e., vasoplegia versus cardiogenic shock, will help us defining the strategy to be used in the symptomatic treatment of sulfide exposure and hopefully limit its potential devastating neurological sequelae [ ]. To clarify this outstanding issue, we determined the hemodynamic changes, i.e., cardiac output, peripheral arterial blood flow, intra-cardiac and arterial pressures and stroke volume along with the change in peripheral resistances and lactate production as a function of the concentrations of H 2 S in the blood during stepwise increase or constant rate of sulfide infusion in anesthetized, mechanically ventilated rats.
In this manuscript, the term sulfide or H 2 S is used interchangeably, as dissolved/soluble H 2 S when in solution in the blood or in cells is, at physiological pH, mainly (70–80 %) in the form of the anion HS − , while the gaseous form of H 2 S, which is responsible for H 2 S partial pressure and thus its diffusion across membranes, is only 20–30 % of the total pool of free sulfide [ , ]. Of note is that the majority of H 2 S produced or infused is combined with proteins and metallo-compounds (see [ , ] and [ ] for review and references). To describe the toxicology of the members of this “family” of molecules, H 2 S will be used for convenience.
Materials and Methods
Animal Preparation
Adult male Sprague–Dawley rats weighing 490 ± 84 g (Charles River) were studied. All experiments were conducted in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, 8th Edition (National Research Council (US) Institute for Laboratory Animal Research). The study was approved by the Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. All rats were housed in cages on a temperature-controlled room (24 ± 1 °C) with 12-h light/dark cycle and were provided with standard laboratory diet and water ad libitum.
Anesthesia was induced with inhalation of isoflurane 3.5 % in O 2 , followed by the urethane (1.2 g/kg, i.p.). Rats were tracheostomized (14G surflo catheter, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) and mechanically ventilated (frequency of breathing 80 breaths/min, minute ventilation ~350 ml/min) to maintain PaO 2 around 80 mmHg. To prevent any spontaneous breathing movement, a muscular relaxant was infused via tail vein (10 mg/kg/h, Rocuronium Bromide, Hospira, Inc. Lake Forest, IL). A catheter (PE-50 tubing) was inserted into the right femoral artery for continuous monitoring of systemic arterial blood pressure. Additional catheters were inserted into the right femoral vein for NaHS infusion and left carotid artery for arterial blood sampling. Adequate ventilation was monitored by periodic arterial blood gas measurements. Arterial blood (0.1 ml) was sampled, and the gases partial pressures in O 2 (PaO 2 ), CO 2 (PaCO 2 ), and blood lactate concentration were measured using i-STAT1 blood gas analyzer (Abaxis, Union City, CA).
The left femoral artery was isolated, and a transonic flow probe (MA1PRB, Transonic Systems Inc. Ithaca, NY) was placed around the artery.
Our initial purpose was to determine the change in cardiac output and peripheral resistance. Therefore, in a first group of rats (see protocol section for further information), a catheter (20G surflo catheter, TERUMO, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted into the right ventricle through the right jugular vein for continuous monitoring of right ventricular pressure. Cardiac output was determined as follows: The first and second ribs on the left side were partially resected, and left upper lobe of the lung was retracted to expose the pulmonary artery trunk. The small incision of the pericardium was performed, and the pulmonary artery was isolated from surrounding tissues. A transonic flow probe (MA2PSB) was placed around the isolated pulmonary trunk just above the right ventricle.
To further quantify the effects of sulfide on the left ventricle function, a separate group of rats was equipped with a catheter (PE-50 tubing) inserted into the left ventricle through the right carotid artery. This allowed the continuous monitoring of left ventricular pressure while measuring cardiac output via the determination of aortic blood. A median sternotomy and a small incision of the pericardium were performed to expose the ascending aorta. A transonic flow probe (MA2PSB) was placed around the ascending aorta just above the coronary arteries. Great care was taken to prevent compression of vessels or obstruction of circulation during the procedure.
At the end of the experiment, rats were euthanized by injection of a lethal dose of barbiturate (200 mg/kg) into the right heart through the jugular catheter, followed by aortic dissection.
Measurements
The arterial and ventricular catheters were connected to pressure transducer (BD DTXPlus Transducer, Becton–Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ; amplifier TA-100, CWE, Ardmore, PA) to monitor blood pressure.
The blood flow probes were connected to the transit-time flowmeter (TS420, Transonic Systems Inc., Ithaca, NY).
Expiratory flow was measured using a pneumotachograph (1100 Series, Hans Rudolph, Inc. Shawnee, KS), as previously described [ ]. Mixed diluted expired O 2 (FchO 2 ), CO 2 (FchCO 2 ) and H 2 S fractions (FchH 2 S) were measured continuously using O 2 (Oxystar-100, CWE Inc., Ardmore, PA), CO 2 (model 17630, VacuMed, Ventura, CA) and H 2 S (Interscan RM series; range 0–200 ppm, Interscan Corporation, Simi Valley, CA) analyzers.
All signals were digitized at 400 Hz using an analog-to-digital data acquisition system (Power Lab 16/35, AD Instruments, Inc., Colorado Springs, CO) and were visualized on-line. All data were stored for further analysis by LabChart7 (AD Instruments, Inc., Colorado Springs, CO).
Data Analysis
Blood flow was determined by positive integration of the flow signals every 3 s then expressed in ml/min. Total peripheral resistance and hindlimb peripheral resistance were computed by dividing mean arterial pressure by mean cardiac output or mean femoral artery blood flow, respectively. For the evaluation of left ventricular function, left ventricular systolic pressure (LVSP) and heart rate (HR) were determined by peak detection, and d P /d t max was analyzed by derivative of the left ventricular pressure signal.
Breathing frequency ( f ) and tidal volume (VT) were determined using peak detection and integration of the expiratory flow signal, respectively, and minute ventilation (VE) was computed as f × VT in body temperature and pressure, saturated (BTPS) conditions.
Mixed expired fraction of H 2 S (FEH 2 S) were computed as previously described [ ]. The partial pressure of expired H 2 S (PEH 2 S) was then calculated as FEH 2 S × barometric pressure (PB, 760 mmHg). Then, alveolar partial pressure of H 2 S (PAH 2 S) assimilated to the arterial partial pressure of H 2 S (PaH 2 S) was computed [ ]. Finally, the concentration of gaseous H 2 S in the blood (CgH 2 S) was then calculated as: CgH 2 S = 0.00012 × PaH 2 S, with 0.00012 being the coefficient of solubility of H 2 S (0.09 mol/l/760 mmHg at 37 °C in saline). Assuming that H 2 S is under the form of H 2 S gas and its sulfhydryl anion HS − at a ratio of 1/3 and 2/3 in the arterial blood [ ], the concentration of dissolved H 2 S could be estimated as three times CgH 2 S.
Experimental Protocols: Intravenous NaHS Infusion
H 2 S solution was prepared using sodium hydrosulfide hydrate (NaHS, Sigma, St., Louis, MO). The molecular weight of the “hydrated” form of NaHS was 74.08 g/mol as the crystals used for preparing the solution contained 75 % NaHS—25 % H 2 O. NaHS was diluted in saline at a concentration of 0.8 mg/ml (10.8 mM) and prepared immediately prior each experiment and kept in airtight syringes. The level of exposure to H 2 S was determined based on the relationship we have previously established between the blood concentrations, rate of exogenously administered H 2 S and the corresponding clinical symptoms, i.e., H 2 S-induced apnea using continuous infusion of NaHS solution [ , ].
First, a group of 14 rats was divided into two sets, randomly selected, one received NaHS infusion ( n = 7) while the other received saline ( n = 7). After 10 min of stable recording, intravenous NaHS infusion was started at the rate of 0.05 ml/min (0.5 micromoles/min) using a syringe pump (Fusion 100, Chemyx Inc., Stafford, TX). Infusion rate was increased by 0.05 ml/min every 2 min until 0.6 ml/min (6.5 micromoles/min). Based on our previous experiments, the rate of 0.6 ml/min will increase CgH 2 S by more than 2 μM and produce a breathing stimulation [ , ]. To limit the number of animals that were killed and after having observed that the cardiovascular effects were extremely short-lasting (few minutes at the best after the cessation of NaHS infusion all circulatory parameters returned to normal), two of seven rats in both groups received a second series of saline or NaHS infusion. Animals were then given a recovery period long enough so that blood pressure and flow returned to normal before repeating the same infusion. All parameters were monitored continuously and averaged over the last 30 s of each step of infusion. Arterial blood was sampled before and after the periods of NaHS infusion. Blood gas analysis was performed immediately after sampling. Corresponding volume of saline was infused at the same rate of NaHS infusion in the control group.
In an additional group of six rats, left ventricular pressure and aortic flow were determined while NaHS was infused at a constant rate just above the level found to decrease cardiac output (0.6–0.8 ml/min see result section), in keeping with the data obtained in the protocol described above.
Finally, at the end of the experiment, NaHS was infused at a higher rate of 2.0 ml/min in five rats, while the changes in cardiac function versus peripheral resistance were determined.
Statistical Analysis
All results are presented as mean ± SD. All variables of interest were compared between the vehicle control group and the group receiving NaHS at the corresponding rate of infusion using two-way ANOVA for repeated measurements. Post hoc comparisons were performed using a Bonferroni correction. P < 0.05 was regarded as significant for all these comparisons. Data were compared before and during each rate of infusion using ANOVA for repeated measurements. For left ventricular function determined during constant infusion, the values were compared between baseline and 2 min into NaHS infusion, using paired t test. All statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism 6 (Graphpad Software, La Jolla, CA).
Results
1- Effect of incremental infusion of saline vs NaHS (from 0 to 6.5 micromoles/min) on circulation.
Figure 1 shows an example of the effects of saline versus NaHS infusion on mean arterial blood pressure (Mean ABP), mean right ventricular pressure (Mean RV pressure), mean cardiac output, total peripheral vascular resistance and estimated CgH 2 S (displayed in linear and log scale) in two different rats. Averaged data are shown in Figs. 2 , 3 , 4 . At the end of the protocol, the total volume of fluid infused to each animal of both groups was the same (7.8 ml, ~15 ml/kg). Fig. 1 Example of the effects of saline ( left panel ) and sulfide infusion ( right panel ) on mean arterial blood pressure (Mean ABP), mean right ventricular pressure (Mean RV pressure), mean cardiac output, total peripheral vascular resistance (total Resistance) and estimated CgH 2 S (displayed in normal and log scale) in two different rats for rate up to 0.6 ml/min (6.5 micromoles/min for the sulfide group). Mean ABP and cardiac output displayed a progressive and continuous rise during saline infusion, with a modest reduction in total resistance. During sulfide infusion (10.8 micromoles/ml), the normal increase in mean ABP was virtually abolished which was associated with the reduction in total resistance, which was clearly visible above 0.4 ml/min (4.3 micromoles/min). A very rapid drop in mean ABP, mean RV pressure and mean cardiac output was observed after 0.55 ml/min (5.9 micromoles/min) of NaHS infusion. CgH 2 S increased exponentially during NaHS infusion Fig. 2 Averaged blood pressure, blood flow and vascular resistance in the groups of rats receiving saline ( open circle ) versus NaHS ( closed circle ) infusion as a function of rate of infusion (for rate up to 0.6 ml/min). Mean arterial blood pressure (ABP) and cardiac output are increasing throughout the period of saline infusion, without major changes in femoral blood flow. This resulted in a modest reduction in total peripheral resistance. NaHS infusion induced similar changes in all parameters between 0 and 0.35 ml/min (3.8 micromoles/min), above these levels, mean ABP, femoral resistance and total resistance departed from saline infusion showing a significantly lower blood pressure associated with a decrease in peripheral resistance. At 0.6 ml/min (6.5 micromoles/min). there was a trend for a decrease in cardiac output in the NaHS group. The iso-rate (iso-volume) difference in the variation in mean ABP between saline and H 2 S group is illustrated as a function of CgH 2 S (top right). Compared to saline infusion, NaHS infusion clearly reduced blood pressure when CgH 2 S increased. Values are shown in mean ± SD. * significantly different from saline/control at P < 0.05. # significantly different from baseline at P < 0.05 Fig. 3 Averaged cardiac parameters (stroke volume, heart rate and right ventricular (RV) pressure) in the groups of rats receiving saline ( open circle ) versus NaHS ( closed circle ) infusion as a function of rate of infusion, for rate up to 0.6 ml/min. During saline infusion, stroke volume increased according to infusion rate, but systolic RV pressure, diastolic RV pressure and heart rate did not change. The only significant changes produced by NaHS infusion were observed at 0.6 ml/min (6.5 micromoles/min), wherein systolic RV pressure decreased and diastolic RV pressure significantly increased, associated with a non-significant decrease in stroke volume. Values are shown in mean ± SD. * significantly different from saline/control at P < 0.05. # significantly different from baseline at P < 0.05 Fig. 4 CgH 2 S as a function of the rate of NaHS infusion, for rate up to 0.6 ml/min (6.5 micromoles/min). CgH 2 S showed exponential-like increase during NaHS infusion in keeping with the rate of infusion. The data from our previous study ([ ], gray symbols ) fit with the relationship in this study. Values are shown as mean ± SD 1-a. Effects of saline infusion (control)
Hemodynamic Changes
As illustrated in Figs. 1 , 2 , 3 , mean ABP, mean RV pressure and cardiac output increased progressively during vehicle saline infusion in keeping to the rate of sulfide infusion. Mean ABP, which baseline levels averaged 79 ± 12 mmHg, rose throughout the period of infusion becoming significantly higher than the pre-infusion values at 0.40 ml/min ( P < 0.01). Mean ABP increased by 9 ± 10 mmHg at 0.6 ml/min of infusion ( P < 0.01) as shown in Fig. 2 . This increase in mean ABP was clearly related to a rise in cardiac output, which (baseline 55 ± 14 ml/min) rose by 23 ± 18 % at 0.6 ml/min of infusion ( P < 0.01). Baseline heart rate was 402 ± 125 bpm and did not change significantly throughout the period of infusion (Fig. 3 ), as a result, the rise in cardiac output was exclusively related an increase in stroke volume (Fig. 3 ): stroke volume averaged 0.147 ± 0.047 ml at baseline and increased significantly at 0.50 ml/min infusion ( P < 0.01) to reached +22 ± 21 % at 0.6 ml/min infusion ( P < 0.01). This increase in cardiac output related to volume that was infused was associated with a modest reduction in peripheral resistance; total peripheral vascular resistance (Fig. 2 ) was decreased by −7 ± 12 % at 0.6 ml/min (not significant). Femoral flow did not change significantly throughout the infusion period (Fig. 2 ).
Blood Gas and Lactate
Baseline PaO 2 and PaCO 2 were 79 ± 16 and 34 ± 6 mmHg, respectively, and were not affected by the saline infusion. At the end of period of infusion, PaO 2 and PaCO 2 averaged 75 ± 11 and 36 ± 7 mmHg, respectively. Blood lactate at the end of saline infusion was 1.69 ± 0.29 mM. 1-b. Effects of NaHS infusion
CgH2S During NaHS Infusion
As illustrated in Figs. 1 , 4 , CgH 2 S increased in keeping with the rate of NaHS infusion following an exponential pattern.
Hemodynamic Changes
Baseline levels of mean ABP (83 ± 18 mmHg), stroke volume (0.124 ± 0.034 ml), cardiac output (53 ± 12 ml/min) and femoral flow (3.5 ± 1.7 ml/min) were not different from the saline group. When compared to saline infusion, the effects of H 2 S on circulation can be described in keeping with the rate of infusion as follows: a. Up to 0.35 ml/min (~3.8 micromoles/min)
The changes in mean ABP, blood flow, pressure in the heart and peripheral resistance were indistinguishable from the effects of saline infusion. Mean ABP increased by 5 ± 7 mmHg from baseline i.e., within the same range as saline infusion (Figs. 2 and 3 ). CgH 2 S reached a value, which averaged 0.31 μM. b. From 0.35 to 0.55 ml/min (3.8–5.9 micromoles/min)
Mean ABP during NaHS infusion diverged from saline infusion and decreased significantly along with a reduction in peripheral resistance. This change in mean ABP was significantly different from the saline group above 0.45 ml/min infusion (4.9 micromoles/min, P < 0.05). Cardiac output continuously increased by 20 ± 10 % of the baseline value at 0.55 ml/min (5.9 micromoles/min, P < 0.05 from baseline). Femoral flow also increased by 14 ± 25 % from baseline at 0.55 ml/min (although this difference was not significant). Total vascular resistance showed significant decrease from baseline at 0.45 ml/min ( P < 0.05) and continued to decrease reaching −19 ± 5 % at 0.55 ml/min ( P < 0.01). All the changes in vascular resistance were significantly different from saline group between 0.45 and 0.55 ml/min of NaHS infusion ( P < 0.01). This progressive reduction in mean ABP and peripheral resistance was associated with an increase in stroke volume (19 ± 16 % at 0.55 ml/min, P < 0.05). These effects were observed at CgH 2 S between 0.31 and 1.36 μM. c. From 0.55 to 0.6 ml/min (5.9–6.5 micromoles/min)
Figure 5 displays an example of the effects of infusion during the transition from 0.55 to 0.6 ml/min on arterial pressure, cardiac output, femoral flow and CgH 2 S in one rat. On average, blood pressure continued to decrease (Fig. 2 ), but this time along with a decrease in systolic RV pressure, stroke volume (Fig. 3 ) and cardiac output as soon as the rate of infusion was above 0.55 ml/min. These effects were observed for CgH 2 S, which averaged 1.36 μM. The most striking change was an increase in diastolic right ventricular pressure and drop in systolic RV pressure (Fig. 1 and 3 ), which was significant at 0.6 ml/min, reflecting a reduction in cardiac performance. Infusion was stopped at this rate, and both blood pressure and cardiac output were able to recover very rapidly i.e., as soon as the infusion was interrupted. Fig. 5 Example of the effects of NaHS infusion at 0.55–0.60 ml/min (5.9–6.5 micromoles/min) on arterial pressure, cardiac output, femoral flow and CgH 2 S in one rat. Both blood pressure and blood flow started to drop when CgH 2 S was around 1-2 microM
Blood Gas and Lactate
Baseline PaO 2 and PaCO 2 were 87 ± 11 mmHg and 35 ± 6 mmHg, respectively. After the period of NaHS infusion, PaO 2 and PaCO 2 were 82 ± 8 and 36 ± 8 mmHg, respectively, and therefore were not affected by NaHS infusion, while blood lactate averaged 2.59 ± 0.69 mM ( P < 0.01 vs. saline). 2. Effect of NaHS infusion on left ventricular function at 0.6–0.8 ml/min (6.5–8.6 micromoles/min)
We found that left ventricular and blood pressure dropped along with cardiac output at 0.6–0.8 ml/min (Figs. 6 and 7 ). Cardiac output dropped by half (152 ± 47–75 ± 33 ml/min/kg) 88–141 s (median 108 s) after the onset of sulfide infusion. At the same time, left ventricular systolic pressure (LVSP) decreased from 94 ± 19 to 62 ± 11 mmHg ( P < 0.01), and heart rate decreased from 433 ± 78 to 311 ± 100 bpm ( P < 0.01); d P /d t max also dropped by about half from 3,260 ± 946 to 1,626 ± 432 mmHg/s ( P < 0.01). This severe reduction in cardiac contractility occurred when H 2 S concentration in the arterial blood reached 7.6 ± 0.6 μM. Fig. 6 Example of effects of NaHS infusion at a rate of 0.8 ml/min (8.6 micromoles/min) on the arterial blood pressure, electrocardiogram, cardiac output and left ventricular pressure in one rat. 2–3 min into NaHS infusion, arterial blood pressure, cardiac output and left ventricular pressure largely decreased compared to baseline Fig. 7 Mean ± SD values of left ventricular functions: mean arterial blood pressure (ABP), cardiac output, peripheral resistance, left ventricular systolic pressure (LVSP), d P /d t max and heart rate at baseline (before infusion) and at 2 min into an infusion of 0.6–0.8 ml/min (6.5–8.6 micromoles/min) NaHS in six rats. All the left ventricular-related parameters significantly dropped during NaHS infusion, without any reduction in peripheral resistance. # significantly different from baseline, P < 0.01
CgH2S and Circulatory Effects of H2S
Figure 8 displays all individual data obtained from all NaHS infusion tests, showing the change in cardiac output and blood pressure as a function of gaseous H 2 S concentration from infusions ranging from 0 to 0.8 ml/min. Clearly, the decrease in blood pressure was associated with a drop in cardiac output as soon as CgH 2 S increased above 2–3 μM. Fig. 8 Individual data points obtained from all NaHS infusion tests. Note that when CgH 2 S reached concentrations about 2–3 μM, a progressive in drop blood pressure associated with a reduction in cardiac output was observed leading to severe reduction in cardiac output as soon as CgH 2 S was above 3 μM (see discussion section for more details)
3. Effect of NaHS infusion at a rate of 2.0 ml/min (21.6 micromoles/min)
Finally, in five rats, the infusion of NaHS was resumed at the end of the experiment and maintained at about three times the levels required to affect cardiac function. Both arterial pressure and cardiac output dropped dramatically (Fig. 9 a). In all cases, effective cardiac contractions stopped being discernible on the arterial pressure or cardiac output signals after 3 min, without any reduction in peripheral vascular resistance (Fig. 9 b). In other words, at the time required for cardiac output to drop by half when a rate of sulfide infusion of 7–8 micromoles/min was used, ~20 micromoles/min led to a complete cessation of cardiac contractions. Fig. 9 a Example of the effects of NaHS infusion at 2.0 ml/min (21.6 micromoles/min) on arterial pressure and cardiac output in one rat. Both blood pressure and cardiac output rapidly dropped during continuous infusion of high dose of NaHS. Pulse pressure was undetectable within 3 min. b Averaged arterial blood pressure (ABP), arterial pulse pressure, cardiac output and total peripheral resistance in five rats receiving NaHS infusion at 2.0 ml/min. During NaHS infusion, arterial pressure, pulse pressure and cardiac output significantly dropped within the first minute of infusion, while estimated total peripheral resistance increased until cardiac asystole occurred. Values are shown in mean ± SD. # significantly different from the value at −60 s, P < 0.05
Discussion
Intravenous infusion of NaHS produces a small, but significant reduction in peripheral vascular resistance in anesthetized ventilated rats at concentrations of gaseous H 2 S ranging between 0.5 and 1.0 μM. Below these levels, no circulatory changes were observed, whereas, as soon as CgH 2 S increased above 2–3 μM, which corresponds to levels not even associated with symptoms of toxicity [ , ], cardiac contractility decreased very rapidly, leading to a dramatic reduction in cardiac output but with no additional reduction in peripheral vascular resistance.
H2S and Peripheral Vascular Resistance
We found that H 2 S decreased the peripheral vascular resistance by an average of 19 %, leading to a relative reduction in ABP (in keeping to the effect of saline infusion) only in narrow and low ranges of H 2 S infusion and concentrations (Fig. 1 , 2 , 3 ). These results are qualitatively consistent with earlier findings showing that H 2 S can produce a vascular relaxation in various in vitro vascular preparations [ ]. As discussed in the following paragraphs, it should be pointed out that the concentrations required to produce such an effect, in vitro, were one to two orders of magnitude higher than the concentrations found to be effective in our in vivo experiments. Previous data obtained in small animals using H 2 S intravenous injection have resulted in a drop of blood pressure [ , ]. The mechanism, which has been put forward to account for the effects of H 2 S, relates to the activation of K-ATP channels in smooth muscle [ ]. In addition, H 2 S-induced vasorelaxation, although not directly mediated by cyclic guanosine 5′-monophosphate (cGMP), appears to be potentiated by the NO pathway [ , ]. Our present findings depart from most in vitro studies, in the sense that the effects we observed remain very modest and are only produced in a very small range of diffusible H 2 S concentrations in contact with the vessels. Certainly, various factors could have blunted or limited the vascular of H 2 S in vivo, one of them being the stimulation of the chemoreceptors, which occurs in the same ranges of CgH 2 S as those producing a reduction in peripheral resistance [ ]. Such stimulation could have activated the sympathetic system triggering in turn a classical vasoconstriction, which can oppose any direct vascular relaxation effects (chemoreceptor-induced sympathetic stimulation [ , ]). Intravenous bolus injection of an exogenous H 2 S solution has long been shown to increase breathing by stimulation of carotid body chemoreceptor [ , ]. In our study, the rats were mechanically ventilated and were given a muscular relaxant to prevent the confounding effects of spontaneous breathing on circulation. As a consequence, the determination of expired H 2 S and blood flow were not influenced by the changes in breathing pattern. Still H 2 S-induced direct stimulation of chemoreceptors, cardiac receptors, or even lung receptors might have affected peripheral blood flow regulation [ , ]. Incidentally, the ratio between systolic RV pressure and pulmonary blood flow, a marker of right ventricular afterload, was not different between the two groups. This is consistent with the study using human pulmonary artery which could only be dilated with a concentration 200 times higher than the concentrations we used in vivo (500 μM of H 2 S [ ]). Sun et al. [ ] also found differences in the response to NaHS between rat aortic and pulmonary arterial rings, the latter being less responsive to NaHS than aorta. They also found that pulmonary artery rings could produce a vasoconstriction after 2 min of administration of very large concentrations of soluble NaHS (50–200 μM).
Toxicity of H2S for the Heart, Depression of Cardiac Contractility
H 2 S at levels, lower than those we previously found to be able to depress breathing [ ], decreases cardiac contractility (see also Fig. 8 ). As soon as the level of soluble H 2 S in the blood increases to higher concentrations and reaches about 7 μM, cardiac output was severely depressed leading to asystole within a few minutes.
H 2 S can affect cardiac contractility via a direct inhibition of ATP production [ ] or an inhibition of L-type calcium channels [ , ], producing in turn a negative inotropic effect. In addition, H 2 S appears to potentiate the effect of NO [ , , ]. NO is thought to be one of the main mechanisms of cardiac depression in various conditions wherein a cardiogenic shock can develops, e.g., septic shock [ , ]. The “blocking” effect of H 2 S on calcium channels appears to be the major factor leading to the reduction in the contractility of the cardiomyocytes [ , ]. At least two different mechanisms could be put forward to account for this effect. The first one relates the sulfhydration of cysteine residues on calcium channels [ ]. This mechanism has important potential implications since sulfhydration could be antagonized through the creation of reducing environment of the heart to “release” H 2 S. Second, calcium channel activity seems to be able to be modulated by the redox environment of the cells [ ], and the latter could be greatly affected by the presence of H 2 S. Of note is that all the circulatory parameters returned to their baseline values very rapidly following the cessation of H 2 S exposure, suggesting that the mechanisms of depression in cardiac contractility are rapidly reversible, and thus compatible with the very rapid oxidation of H 2 S [ , ] as well as the trapping of free H 2 S by the metallo-compounds [ ] present in the heart (myoglobin). Maintaining H 2 S exposure at levels of more than 5–10 μM produces major cardiac depression and asystole.
Circulatory Effects as a Function of H2S Levels
In our previous studies [ ], we found that breathing was stimulated in sedated rats by H 2 S at CgH 2 S ranging from 1–3 μM, levels that would be already associated with a reduction in cardiac contractility, while a terminal apnea occured around 8 microM. In in vitro experiments, H 2 S is usually diluted in saline or phosphate-buffered solution and is therefore only present in soluble forms (H 2 S and HS − ). In contrast, in the blood, a large part of H 2 S, which can be measured for instance using monobromobimane technique [ , ], is combined with plasma proteins or hemoglobin (and thus is not diffusible). We used the level of alveolar H 2 S to estimate the gaseous and thus soluble forms of H 2 S interacting with the heart or the vascular structure in vivo. Assuming that H 2 S is under the form of H 2 S gas and HS − at a ratio of 1/3 in the arterial blood [ , ], the total free concentration of H 2 S and HS − was therefore approximately 4 μM, when the cardiac function was affected. This effect seems therefore to develop very “early” during H 2 S intoxication. These data are consistent with results obtained in the perfused rat heart, wherein a reduction in cardiac function can be observed starting at only 1 μM of NaHS [ ]. Incidentally, such low microM levels of H 2 S have also been shown to be able to already affect the cytochrome c oxidase activity [ , ].
Model Limitations
The modality of sulfide exposure used in this study, i.e., intravenous infusion of sulfide, is not faithful to a clinical scenario of H 2 S intoxication, wherein H 2 S is typically inhaled. When in solution NaHS is actually present under the form of H 2 S/HS − , i.e., in gaseous form (20–30 %) and under the form of HS − (70–80 %) [ , , ]. These two forms constitute the pool of soluble sulfide (and in the same proportion) in the blood and in the cells. Indeed, as mentioned in the introduction, whether “H 2 S” is produced endogenously, inhaled, infused, or formed from a slow-releasing agent, it is never present in its gaseous form only: As soon as H 2 S reaches the blood or increases in the tissues, the majority of soluble H 2 S is under the form of HS − , while an even larger pool combines with proteins. All these pools are always in equilibrium in keeping with the level of H 2 S partial pressure [ ]. The general term sulfide should always be preferable to the use of H 2 S, as H 2 S in its gaseous form is never present alone in a biological milieu.
Certainly, the toxicity of sulfide toward the lungs and the upper-airways [ , ] is expected to be blunted, at any given level of sulfide in the blood, if sulfides are infused rather than inhaled [ ]. However, as soon as H 2 S reaches the blood, the original site of diffusion, whether the alveolar regions or a direct venous infusion, is not going to affect the distribution of the various pools of sulfide in the blood and the concentration of H 2 S in the tissues (see above paragraph and reference for discussion [ , , ]). It is, however, likely that when infused into the venous blood, concentrations of free H 2 S reaching the right heart would be higher than those entering the left heart (exposed to a lower concentration after a passage through the lungs), while the opposite is expected to occur during H 2 S inhalation, i.e., when sulfide reached directly the left heart from the pulmonary circulation. Finally, recent studies have been using promising slow H 2 S-releasing agent such as GYY4137 [ ] to study the physiological effects of sulfide on vessels. The interest of using these compounds in investigating sulfide toxicity is yet to be established. Indeed, a slow H 2 S-releasing compound [ ] is not faithful to a real-life scenario created by an exposure to toxic levels of H 2 S, in keeping with the very fast kinetics of H 2 S toxicity (coma, respiratory arrest or circulatory failure), which can be produced within seconds during inhalation of H 2 S or infusion of solution of sulfide obtained from NaHS [ , ]. Perhaps more importantly, whenever GYY4137 “releases” H 2 S, the latter will, for most of it, be immediately transformed into HS − along with the creation of a pool of sulfides combined to proteins in various ways, including in sulfhydration form [ , ], just like any sources of exogenous or endogenous H 2 S. For all intends and purposes, the reduction in left cardiac contractility during H 2 S infusion that we are reporting in the present study appears to be an early sign of sulfide toxicity and thus represents a relevant mechanism responsible of the circulatory failure that occurs very early during sulfide inhalation. The limits of using a sedated animal have been discussed in detail in one of our previous papers [ ].
Conclusion
Continuous intravenous infusion of a sulfide solution prepared from NaHS produces a modest reduction in peripheral vascular resistance in rats, which occurs when CgH 2 S reaches 0.5–1 μM (2–4 μM of total soluble sulfide, i.e., comprising H 2 S and HS − ) in the arterial blood, corresponding to levels of sulfide we previously found capable of stimulating breathing. However, the range of exogenous H 2 S able to produce this effect is relatively narrow and as soon as gaseous H 2 S concentration reaches 2–3 μM, i.e., still below levels of sulfide producing an apnea, a significant depression in cardiac contractility occurs leading to a fall in cardiac output and blood pressure as sulfide concentrations increase. This finding supports the view that H 2 S-induced circulatory failure is predominantly related to a cardiogenic shock, with little involvement of the peripheral vascular network.