Introduction
Citrinin (CIT) is a secondary fungal metabolite produced by several species of the genera Penicillium and Aspergillus (Frisvad et al. ; Geisen et al. ). It is mainly found in stored grains and also in several other plant products (EFSA ; Xu et al. ). CIT is also known as unwanted contaminant in rice fermented with Monascus spp. (red yeast rice) which is used for food coloring and meat preservation in Asia and now widely marketed as a food supplement (DFG ; Liao et al. ; Kiebooms et al. ). CIT has been found along with ochratoxin A (OTA) in food and feed and their co-occurrence has raised concerns for human and animal health (Flajs and Peraica ; Ostry et al. ). CIT is structurally related to OTA and shows similar toxic properties, with kidney being the primary target organ for both mycotoxins in several mammalian species (EFSA , ). Although CIT is a less potent nephrotoxin compared to OTA, it can occur at higher levels in food and feed than OTA. Considering toxic effects of CIT observed in animals and other studies (see below: “ Toxicity of CIT and considerations in a regulatory context ”), and possible combined effects with OTA, it is important to assess human exposure to CIT for a better characterization of risks from this food contaminant (Ali ; Degen et al. ). Yet, the available occurrence data for CIT in food commodities are still insufficient for conducting a conventional dietary exposure assessment, despite some recent advances in the analysis of cereals and other plant-derived products (EFSA ; Lopez et al. ).
A complementary approach to assess mycotoxin exposure is biomonitoring, which involves the analysis of parent compounds and/or metabolites in human biological samples, such as blood, urine or breast milk (Duarte et al. ; Turner et al. ; Warth et al. ). Recent developments in LC–MS/MS-based analytical techniques have facilitated biomonitoring studies for mycotoxins, including analysis of biomarkers of exposure to CIT. Biomarker analysis in human body fluids covers intake of mycotoxins from all dietary sources and exposure routes. Human biomonitoring can provide valuable insights into exposure, especially in developing countries with no legal requirements for surveillance of food contaminants (Ali et al. , ). In human biomonitoring, urine is the preferred matrix to investigate exposure because of non-invasive sampling procedures for the participants in field studies.
This review will focus on studies of CIT biomarkers measured in urines of different human cohorts, and the use of these data for estimating their daily CIT intake, based on recent insights in human kinetics of this mycotoxin (Degen et al. ). A short account of toxic properties of CIT is given, relevant in evaluations by scientific committees and setting of limit values to protect humans against health risks from CIT exposure. Approaches in biomonitoring, along with methodological aspects are discussed, and novel data on inter-individual and temporal variability of CIT biomarker levels are provided. Then present knowledge on biomarker occurrence in urine and other matrices (blood, breast milk) is reviewed, followed by biomarker-based CIT intake estimates for several populations. A section on biomarkers of effect precedes our conclusions and recommendations for future studies.
Toxicity of CIT and considerations in a regulatory context
Citrinin is known to exert toxic effects on kidney, liver and other organs of experimental animals, and has been implicated along with OTA in porcine nephropathy (Flajs and Peraica ). The kidney has been identified as the principal target organ for CIT in repeated dose toxicity studies with rats and swine (EFSA ). Species differences in susceptibility have been observed, also in studies on its acute toxicity: an LD 50 (lethal dose 50%, the dose causing death of 50% of the animals) for CIT depends on the route of administration, animal species and physiological conditions. For example in rabbits the oral LD 50 is 134 mg/kg b.w., but lower with intraperitoneal and intravenous administration (50 and 19 mg/kg b.w., respectively). In rats, the LD 50 for CIT with both i.p. or s.c. dosing is 67 mg/kg b.w. (data reviewed in Flajs and Peraica ; EFSA ). But, acute intoxications are rare and occur only with highly contaminated feed rations. More important is the question whether long-term CIT intake results in adverse effects and at which dose levels. In this context, a 90-day study in male Wistar rats (Lee et al. ) is particularly relevant: in animals which received daily CIT doses between 0.1 and 20 µg/kg b.w., no toxicological effects were observed upon clinical, biochemical, and histological examination. This is consistent with a NOAEL of 20 µg/kg b.w. per day for nephrotoxicity, and in accord with a 8-week study in swine (Sándor et al. ) in which also a NOAEL of 20 µg/kg b.w. per day was identified (EFSA ).
CIT was classified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) as group 3 compound (‘not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity in humans’) due to limited evidence for carcinogenicity in rats, and inadequate evidence in human (IARC ). Available animal studies evaluated in 2012 by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) revealed that CIT induces renal adenomas, but no carcinomas. However, as no life-time exposure study was available, the Panel could not draw a conclusion regarding potential carcinogenicity of CIT (EFSA ). Genotoxicity of CIT has been tested in bacteria and different mammalian cells in vitro and in rodents in vivo (Table 8 in EFSA ). These studies show that CIT is not mutagenic, but can induce other types of DNA damage indicative of clastogenic and aneugenic effects. More recent data (compiled in Föllmann et al. ; de Oliveira Filho et al. ; Rasic et al. ) confirm a genotoxic potential for CIT and a dose-related cytotoxicity. Cytotoxicity is characterized by CIT accumulation in the mitochondria and interference with the electron transport chain (Frank ; Chagas et al. ).
Given uncertainties in the database regarding potential carcinogenicity and genotoxicity of CIT, EFSA concluded that the derivation of a health-based guidance value was not appropriate. However, they could derive a ‘level of no concern for nephrotoxicity’: it is based on a no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) of 20 µg/kg b.w. per day in repeated dose toxicity studies with rats and swine, and applying a default factor of 100 to this NOAEL, to account for inter-species and for inter-individual variation (EFSA ). The ‘level of no concern for nephrotoxicity’ in humans of 0.2 µg/kg. b.w. per day derived by EFSA was later on the basis for setting a maximum level for CIT of 2000 µg/kg for food supplements based on rice fermented with the red yeast Monascus purpureus (European Commission ). So far, there are no regulatory limit values for CIT contamination in other products, nor regular food surveillance for this mycotoxin. Thus, knowledge on human dietary exposure to CIT is very limited, which hampers a proper risk assessment (EFSA ). To gain more insights into human CIT exposure, biomonitoring is a powerful approach: this requires not only sensitive analytical methods for detection of CIT biomarkers, but also information on its kinetics (Ali et al. ).
Kinetics of CIT
Up to now, there is limited information on CIT kinetics. In rats, with intravenous administration of 14 C-CIT (3 mg/kg b.w.), CIT was found after 30 min in liver and kidney (15% and 6% of the dose, respectively), and about 74% of the dose was excreted in urine within 24 h (Phillips et al. ). Upon oral application to rats, the toxin is rapidly absorbed, and maximum CIT levels in serum were observed after 3 h, and decreased quickly thereafter, indicative of an efficient renal clearance (Frank ). In another study, where rats received a rather high dose of CIT (30 mg/kg b.w., 14 C-labeled and unlabeled), dihydrocitrinone (DH-CIT) was first identified as metabolite in urine (accounting for 14.7% of radioactivity), whilst unchanged CIT was the main form (about 40%) present in urine and the only one detected in blood collected after 24 h (Dunn et al. ). In rats given such a high (toxic) dose, the conversion of CIT to its metabolite DH-CIT may be saturated. A different pattern (more DH-CIT than CIT) is found in human urine (see below).
The structures of CIT and DH-CIT are shown in Fig. 1 . Binding of CIT and DH-CIT to serum albumin, the most abundant protein in the circulation has been studied. Their interaction is rather weak, and albumin binding characteristics in vitro are similar for several species, suggesting this property is similar in human and animals (Poór et al. ; Faisal et al. ). Fig. 1 Structure of citrinin (CIT) and its metabolite dihydrocitrinone (DH-CIT, also termed previously as HO-CIT)
The first investigation of CIT kinetics in humans provides now data on its metabolism and the percentage of CIT plus its metabolite DH-CIT that is excreted with urine after a low oral dose (Degen et al. ). Such data are crucial for defining suitable biomarkers of exposure for the mycotoxin (vide infra) and for converting the biomarker levels measured in human urines to provisional daily intake estimates (section below). In the kinetic study, two volunteers received CIT at doses well below the ‘level of no concern for nephrotoxicity’ (subject A: 0.045 and 0.1 μg/kg b.w. given on two different occasions; subject B, 0.1 and 0.114 μg/kg b.w., respectively), and their biomarker levels were analyzed in urine and blood samples collected at timed intervals after dosing (Degen et al. ). Their concentration–time profiles indicated rapid absorption and a median half-life for CIT of 9.4 h in blood plasma. Concentration–time profiles for the urinary analytes showed that CIT undergoes extensive conversion to DH-CIT which is excreted along with the parent compound. The median half-life in urine was 6.7 h and 8.9 h for CIT and DH-CIT, respectively. The cumulative urinary excretion of ‘total CIT’ (sum of CIT and DH-CIT) accounted for 40.2% (median value) of the ingested mycotoxin dose within 24 h. Despite some variation observed in the excretion rate of biomarkers between both individuals, their urinary DH-CIT levels were consistently higher (median 25.25%) than those of CIT (median 14.75%). This analyte pattern resembles that previously found in urines of Bangladeshi (Ali et al. , , ) and of German adults (Ali et al. ; Föllmann et al. ). DH-CIT formation is of interest since this metabolite is considerably less toxic than the parent compound (Föllmann et al. ). Presently, it is unclear which enzyme is involved in the detoxication reaction, and the extent of CIT conversion to DH-CIT may vary between individuals. Nonetheless, ‘total CIT’ (sum of CIT and DH-CIT) is a valid biomarker of exposure in human biomonitoring studies (Degen et al. ).
Biomarkers of exposure
Biomonitoring is commonly understood as a method for assessing human exposure to natural or synthetic compounds based on analysis of biomarkers (Choi et al. ). Biomarkers of exposure measured in human biological matrices are chemicals and their metabolites, or their reaction products with endogenous molecules (DNA or proteins), so-called biochemical effect markers (Angerer et al. ; Choi et al. ). Biomarkers of exposure determined in biological fluids inform about the occurrence of a hazardous compound and an absorbed internal dose resulting from exposure by all routes and environmental sources. The aims of analyzing biomarkers are an early detection of potentially hazardous exposures in a monitored individual or population group (prior to onset of symptoms) and the prevention of adverse health effects (Angerer et al. ; Choi et al. ). Biomonitoring can assess trends of exposure over time, and help to evaluate the efficacy of intervention measures taken to reduce exposure to toxins and thereby protect public health. Biomarker-based research has revealed a linkage between high exposure to some mycotoxins and the incidence of certain diseases, but also a wide range in magnitude of exposure for various geographical areas (Duarte et al. ; Ali et al. ; Turner et al. ).
Biomarkers should be measured by sensitive, specific analytical methods, validated for the given biological specimen and capable to detect even a low level of exposure. Choice of the most appropriate sample type(s) for biomarker analysis requires some knowledge on the kinetics of the target molecule, including its metabolism and half-life in the human organism. For CIT, such data have been summarized above. In human biomonitoring, urines are the most widely used specimen for measuring mycotoxins and their metabolites due to non-invasive collection of such samples. Nevertheless, one has to keep in mind that there are some limitations regarding the use of biomarker data in exposure assessments. These include: (1) collection of 24-h urines is hardly feasible in field studies which usually collect spot (morning) urines; (2) as hydration status and urine volume varies between people, measured biomarker concentrations (e.g., ng/mL urine) are also adjusted for creatinine levels or urine density; (3) often a single urine sample is collected by each individual in a cohort. Thus, biomarker results provide just a “snap-shot” in time, reflecting more or less their typical exposure situation.
Interpreting biomonitoring data in the context of exposure (and risk) assessments requires also considerations of issues related to within- and between-individual variation in biomarker concentrations (Koch et al. ). This issue is most relevant for non-persistent analytes, in particular those with elimination half-lives of less than a day, which applies to CIT and its main metabolite DH-CIT (Degen et al. ; and section above on “ Kinetics of CIT ”). To study intra- and inter-individual variation, CIT–biomarker concentrations were determined in two male volunteers on their usual diet (food habits in Ali et al. ). They provided repeatedly blood plasma and morning urine samples, during a period of 7 weeks (subject 1) or 7 days (subject 2). The results of this analysis using a validated LC–MS/MS method (Degen et al. ) are depicted in Fig. 2 . Fig. 2 CIT and DH-CIT concentrations in plasma and urine samples from subject 1 (top graph a ) and subject 2 (bottom graph b )
Temporal fluctuations in plasma and urine analyte levels were observed in both individuals (Fig. 2 a, b). Yet, despite some intra-individual variation over time, subject 1 had consistently lower mean biomarker concentrations in his plasma (CIT 0.27 ± 0.7 and DH-CIT 0.28 ± 0.11 ng/mL) than subject 2 (CIT 0.47 ± 0.09 and DH-CIT 0.96 ± 0.24 ng/mL). Biomarker levels in the individuals’ urines were also fluctuating, yet averages were lower in subject 1 (mean CIT 0.03 ± 0.01 and DH-CIT 0.08 ± 0.07 ng/mL) than in subject 2 (mean CIT 0.05 ± 0.02 and DH-CIT 0.32 ± 0.25 ng/mL). In short, the analyte concentrations in plasma and urine reveal a clear difference in dietary CIT exposure between the study subjects. Their calculated CIT exposure (based on the highest biomarker urine concentrations found) differs threefold, yet remains below the ‘level of no concern for nephrotoxicity’ for this mycotoxin (Degen et al. ).
Methods and approaches in biomarker analysis
Methods used so far to determine CIT biomarkers in human biological samples (blood or urine) are all based on LC–MS/MS analysis, yet differ with regard to sample preparation (Tables 1 , 2 ). The first method developed for biomonitoring CIT and DH-CIT applies immunoaffinity columns (IAC) for selective enrichment of the analytes from urine and acetonitrile extraction for blood plasma (Blaszkewicz et al. ). Such a targeted approach is more laborious than direct ‘dilute-and-shoot’ approaches in LC–MS/MS-based multi-mycotoxin biomarker methods. Yet, sample clean-up and enrichment of analytes prior to LC–MS/MS analysis minimizes matrix effects leading to signal suppression or enhancement and often achieves higher detection frequencies for the target analytes than those reported for ‘dilute-and-shoot’ methods. This is evident in Table 1 , in particular the results for urines ( n = 50) of a German cohort analyzed by a targeted method with IAC clean-up (Ali et al. ) and also by a direct method (Gerding et al. ). By the latter approach, CIT was not measurable, and the metabolite DH-CIT was quantified in 24% of the samples, whereas the analytes were detected in 82 and 84% of the urines, respectively, by targeted analysis with enrichment. Also multi-mycotoxin analysis with hydrolysis and enrichment of analytes by SPE clean-up of urines led to rather high detection frequencies for CIT and DH-CIT of 66 and 58%, respectively (Šarkanj et al. ). On the other hand, a direct ‘dilute-and-shoot’ method for biomarker analysis allows processing a large of samples in shorter time and simultaneous detection of numerous mycotoxins in urines. Yet, when conjugated metabolites are excreted, as in the case of deoxynivalenol, ochratoxin A, and zearalenone, either reference materials or enzymatic hydrolysis of the conjugated forms prior to LC–MS/MS analysis are required for reliable quantification of biomarkers (Turner et al. ; Ali et al. ; Ali and Degen ; Šarkanj et al. ). There is no evidence for phase II metabolism of CIT and DH-CIT, which are readily excreted with urine (Degen et al. ). Methods such as HPLC with fluorescence detection and ELISA, used for analysis of CIT in food (Xu et al. ) or in biomarker analysis of other mycotoxins (e.g., OTA in urine), have not been validated for CIT biomarker analysis due to a lack of sensitivity and/or specificity. Table 1 Data on the occurrence of CIT and its metabolite DH-CIT (or HO-CIT) in urines from different cohorts Country (cohort) Analyte Incidence n (%) Mean ± SD (range) ng/mL Mean ng/mg crea Method of analysis Clean-up LOD/LOQ (ng/mL) References Bangladesh (adults) Summer season CIT 59/62 (95) 0.10 ± 0.17 (nd–1.22) 0.36 ± 0.60 LC–MS/MS a IAC 0.02/0.05 Ali et al. ( ) DH-CIT 44/62 (71) 0.42 ± 0.98 (nd–5.39) 1.52 ± 4.4 0.05/0.10 Winter season CIT 57/62 (92) 0.59 ± 0.98 (nd–5.03) 0.97 ± 1.76 DH-CIT 60/62 (97) 3.18 ± 8.49 (nd–46.44) 3.94 ± 9.07 Bangladesh (pregnant women) CIT 47/54 (87) 0.31 ± 0.93 (nd–6.93) 0.51 ± 0.99 LC–MS/MS a IAC 0.02/0.05 Ali et al. ( ) DH-CIT 46/54 (85) 0.42 ± 0.82 (nd–5.53) 0.65 ± 0.69 0.05/0.10 Belgium (adults) CIT 140/239 (59) 0.06 ± na (0.002–1.40) 0.07 ± na LC–MS/MS b None 0.001/0.003 Heyndrickx et al. ( ) DH-CIT 14/120 (12) 0.75 ± na (0.14–2.12) 0.74 ± na 0.01/0.03 Belgium (children) CIT 112/155 (72) 0.03 ± na (0.002–0.39) 0.04 ± na None Heyndrickx et al. ( ) DH-CIT 7/124 (6) 0.55 ± na (0.26–0.89) 0.81 ± na Belgium (adults) CIT 19/32 (59) 0.03 ± na (nd–0.12) na LC–MS/MS b None 0.001/0.003 Huybrechts et al. ( ) DH-CIT 21/32 (66) 0.03 ± na (0.013–0.21) na 0.01/0.03 Czech Republic (renal patients) CIT 45/50 (90) 0.016 ± 0.02 (nd–0.087) 0.02 ± 0.02 LC–MS/MS a IAC 0.01/0.02 Malir et al. ( ) DH-CIT 50/50 (100) 0.048 ± 0.034 (0.03–0.16) 0.08 ± 0.07 0.05/0.1 Germany (adults) CIT 41/50 (82) 0.03 ± 0.02 (nd–0.07) 0.03 ± 0.03 LC–MS/MS a IAC 0.02/0.05 Ali et al. ( ) DH-CIT 42/50 (84) 0.10 ± 0.10 (nd–0.51) 0.10 ± 0.11 0.05/0.10 Germany (mill workers) CIT 30/30 (100) – (0.007–0.178) – LC–MS/MS a IAC 0.02/0.05 Föllmann et al. ( ) DH-CIT 30/30 (100) – (0.006–0.460) – 0.05/0.10 Germany (adults) CIT n.d. nd LC–MS/MS b None 0.02/0.05 Gerding et al. ( ) DH-CIT 14/50 (24) 0.12 ± 0.02 (LOQ–0.33) 0.09 ± 0.03 0.02/0.05 Haiti (children, adults) CIT n.d. n.d. LC–MS/MS b None 0.02/0.05 Gerding et al. ( ) DH-CIT 20/142 (14) 0.49 ± 0.95 (LOQ–4.34) 0.28 ± na 0.02/0.05 Nigeria (adults) CIT 79/120 (65.8) 5.96 ± 27.43 (0.15–241.46) – LC–MS/MS a SPE 0.003/0.01 Šarkanj et al. ( ) DH-CIT 69/120 (57.5) 2.39 ± 3.56 (0.05–16.89) – 0.003/0.01 Portugal (adults) CIT 2/94 (2) Median 0.75 (LOD–1.0) Median 1.03 LC–MS/MS b None 0.5/1.0 Martins et al. ( ) nd not detected, na not available, IAC immunoaffinity column, SPE solid phase extraction a Targeted LC–MS/MS method b Direct multi-mycotoxin method Table 2 Data on the occurrence of CIT and its metabolite DH-CIT in blood plasma from different cohorts Country (cohort) Analyte Incidence n (%) Mean ± SD ( ng/mL) Range (ng/mL) Method of analysis Extraction LOD/LOQ (ng/mL) References Bangladesh (young adults) Summer season CIT 55/64 (86) 0.25 ± 0.31 nd–1.96 LC–MS/MS a Acetonitrile 0.07/0.15 Ali et al. ( ) DH-CIT 54/64 (84) 0.37 ± 0.24 nd–0.93 0.15/0.30 Winter season CIT 39/40 (97) 0.47 ± 0.50 nd–2.70 DH-CIT 34/40 (85) 0.40 ± 0.33 nd–1.44 Czech Republic CIT 49/50 (98) 0.06 ± 0.04 nd–0.18 LC–MS/MS a Acetonitrile 0.07/0.15 Malir et al. ( ) Germany (adults) CIT 8/8 (100) – 0.10–0.25 LC–MS/MS a Acetonitrile 0.07/0.15 Blaszkewicz et al. ( ) DH-CIT NA Repeated sampling Volunteer A CIT 7/7 (100) 0.27 ± 0.07 0.15–0.34 LC–MS/MS a Acetonitrile 0.07/0.15 Present data (Fig. 2 ) DH-CIT 7/7 (100) 0.28 ± 0.11 0.14–0.47 0.15/0.30 Volunteer B CIT 7/7 (100) 0.47 ± 0.09 0.40–0.66 DH-CIT 7/7 (100) 0.96 ± 0.24 0.71–1.41 NA not analyzed, nd not detected a Targeted LC–MS/MS method
CIT biomarker data in human urines
Compared to the nephrotoxic mycotoxin OTA, with numerous biomonitoring studies (reviewed in Duarte et al. ; Ali et al. ), the biomarker data for CIT are rather limited so far. The occurrence and concentration of CIT biomarkers in urines of different human cohorts are presented in Table 1 . These data are listed for various countries in alphabetical order.
The first reports on urinary CIT biomarkers are those by Blaszkewicz et al. ( ), and a study applying this method to a larger number of German samples (Ali et al. ), and to our first investigation on CIT biomarkers in Bangladeshi adults (Ali et al. ). A recent follow-up study covering regional and seasonal influences on urinary biomarker levels reported frequent exposure to CIT of Bangladeshi adults (Ali et al. ). Here, the CIT and DH-CIT detection frequencies were 95% and 71% in summer and 92% and 97% in winter, respectively. The mean concentrations for both CIT and DH-CIT were significantly higher in winter (CIT 0.59 ng/mL, DH-CIT 3.18 ng/mL) than in summer (CIT 0.10 ng/mL and DH-CIT 0.42 ng/mL) season, also when creatinine-adjusted urine analyte levels are compared (Table 1 ). In both seasons, the metabolite DH-CIT is present at clearly higher levels in urine than the parent compound, indicative of DH-CIT as an important additional biomarker of CIT exposure. Another biomarker study conducted in a pregnant women cohort indicated a similar exposure (CIT 0.31 and DH-CIT 0.42 ng/mL) as found in the other Bangladesh adult cohorts (Ali et al. ).
A limited number of biomonitoring studies have investigated CIT exposure in European countries (Table 1 ). Regardless of the method used (with or without analyte enrichment prior to LC–MS/MS analysis), biomarker levels detected in European cohorts are lower than those in Bangladeshi cohorts. The mean urinary analyte levels measured for German adults (CIT 0.03 and DH-CIT 0.10 ng/mL; Ali et al. ), resemble those reported for two Belgian adult cohorts (CIT 0.03 and DH-CIT 0.035 ng/mL; Huybrechts et al. ; or CIT 0.06 and DH-CIT 0.75 ng/mL; Heyndrickx et al. ). Low CIT biomarker levels were also observed in mill workers (CIT range 0.007–0.178 ng/mL, DH-CIT range 0.006–0.460 ng/mL) in Germany (Föllmann et al. ). In the Czech Republic, CIT biomarkers have been frequently detected in urines from patients with renal tumors, but at very low levels (CIT 0.016 and DH-CIT 0.048 ng/mL; Malir et al. ). Another study detected no parent compound, but the CIT metabolite DH-CIT in children and adults urines from Haiti (mean 0.49 ± 0.95 ng/mL; Gerding et al. ), at levels similar to those found in European cohorts, yet not as high as those found in Bangladeshi cohorts (Table 1 ).
In these studies, DH-CIT is often present at higher average levels than the parent compound CIT, although the analyte ratios in various urines are quite variable (Ali et al. , , , ). As stated above (section on “ Kinetics of CIT ”), this observation is of interest as the formation of DH-CIT is considered as detoxication process (Föllmann et al. ). Thus, measuring the sum of CIT and its metabolite DH-CIT (‘total CIT’) in human urines is an appropriate biomarker of exposure to this nephrotoxic mycotoxin (Degen et al. ). Not all studies have measured both analytes; e.g., a study from Portugal (Martins et al. ) detected CIT in only 2% of the urines (probably due to a high LOD), yet at levels somewhat higher than in other European cohorts (Table 1 ). Of particular interest is the first report on CIT biomarkers in an African country (Šarkanj et al. ): in the urines of a Nigerian cohort, both CIT and DH-CIT were detected quite frequently, and at concentrations which clearly exceed the mean levels and ranges measured in Bangladeshi or European samples. As this study covered also numerous other mycotoxin biomarkers, the authors have not dealt with their findings on CIT in more detail (Šarkanj et al. ). Thus, we have briefly discussed these data in the section on “ Biomarker-based CIT intake estimates ”.
CIT biomarker data in human blood
Compared to CIT biomarker analysis in urine, the available data in blood, given in Table 2 , are still scarce. A recent study in young adult cohorts in Bangladesh indicated the presence of CIT and its metabolite DH-CIT in blood plasma collected in two sampling periods (Ali et al. ). In that study, CIT and DH-CIT were detected in 86% and 84% of the samples in summer and 97% and 85% in winter, respectively. The average level of plasma analytes was higher in the winter (CIT 0.47 and DH-CIT 0.40 ng/mL) than in the summer (CIT 0.25 and DH-CIT 0.37 ng/mL) season. A gender difference for CIT biomarker level was not found in any sampling round. Also age, body mass index and general food habits were not significantly correlated with biomarker concentrations in this Bangladeshi cohort. A recent study in a Czech cohort ( n = 50) found very low levels of CIT (mean 0.06 ng/mL); DH-CIT was below the limit of detection (0.02 ng/mL) in blood plasma (Malir et al. ). A small pilot study in German adults ( n = 8) measured CIT in all blood plasma, with a range between 0.10 and 0.25 ng/mL (Blaszkewicz et al. ), i.e., lower than ranges determined in young Bangladeshi adults. Furthermore, data for two individuals who provided repeatedly blood samples for CIT and DH-CIT analysis (as previously described and shown in Fig. 2 ) indicated clear differences in plasma biomarker concentrations which appear to relate to their different food habits. This indicates that blood samples are in principle a suitable matrix to characterize CIT exposure. A direct LC–MS/MS-based method for multi-mycotoxin analysis in dried blood and serum spots is thus of interest as it requires only small amounts of sample (Osteresch et al. ). The reliability is limited due to matrix effects leading to signal enhancement for CIT and signal suppression for DH-CIT, but this effect can be compensated in the future because of the recent synthesis of stable isotopically labeled forms of CIT and DH-CIT (Bergmann et al. ).
CIT biomarker data in human breast milk
So far, there are no analytical data available on the occurrence of CIT in human breast milk (Warth et al. ). Yet, one cannot exclude that some CIT when present in the circulation of nursing women is excreted with her breast milk (lactational transfer). Thus, an in silico approach has been used to model a lactational transfer for CIT based on its physicochemical properties and the available kinetic data in humans. The calculated concentrations in maternal blood plasma are higher than those predicted in her breast milk (Degen et al. ). Nonetheless, this might lead to a toxicologically relevant exposure of the nursed infant when maternal CIT exposure is higher than the ‘level of no concern for nephrotoxicity’. Therefore, it is of interest to develop also suitable methods for analysis of CIT in breast milk.
Biomarker-based CIT intake estimates
Suitable methods have become available to measure the occurrence of CIT biomarkers in human urines (Ali et al. , , and further references listed in Table 1 ). Moreover, it is now possible to estimate human exposure to CIT based on recent information on its kinetics in humans (Degen et al. ). The total CIT biomarker concentration in urine samples (sum of individual levels of CIT plus DH-CIT) can be used to calculate human exposure, considering some additional parameters such as daily urine volume and average body weight. By means of the following equation the provisional daily intake (PDI) can be determined, $$ {\text{PDI}}\;(\upmu {\text{g/kg}}\;{\text{bodyweight}}) = \frac{C \times V \times 100}{W \times E}, $$ where C is the urinary total CIT biomarker concentration, V is the average volume of urine excreted in 24 h of 1.6 L (Valentin ); W is the standard body weight of 70 kg (EFSA ) and E is the daily urinary mycotoxin excretion rate of 40% (the median fraction of an oral CIT dose excreted within 24 h; Degen et al. ).
Then the estimated exposure in a given cohort, i.e., their PDI values, can be compared with the daily intake of 0.2 μg/kg b.w., the ‘level of no concern for nephrotoxicity’ set by EFSA ( ), the only presently available preliminary tolerable daily intake (‘TDI’) value for this mycotoxin.
Up to now, a limited number of studies have been conducted to measure the CIT biomarkers in humans (Table 1 ). Applying the above equation, the PDI has been estimated for different cohorts based on individual’s urinary CIT biomarker data (Degen et al. ). The mean CIT intake was rather low in German (3.7 ± 3.0% of ‘TDI’) and in Czech adults (1.8 ± 1.1% of ‘TDI’) and clearly higher in the Bangladeshi cohorts (summer 14.1 ± 30.1%, winter 103.3 ± 244.1%, pregnant women 20 ± 40.3% of ‘TDI’). The mean PDI in the winter urines exceeded the ‘TDI’ and the variability of the intake estimates was also considerably higher among the Bangladeshi cohorts than in the European adults (Degen et al. ). As individual data from studies in Belgium were not available to us, it was not possible to calculate their CIT intake (as PDI mean ± SD) in these cohorts. Yet, the biomarker concentrations given in Table 1 for these cohorts indicate a similarly low CIT exposure as in the German cohort.
Although individual data and the sum for total biomarker levels (CIT and DH-CIT) for the Nigerian cohort are also not available to us, their average urine concentrations (Šarkanj et al. ) are considerably higher than those of Bangladeshi adults, sampled in winter season (Ali et al. ). As the dietary CIT intake (PDI) of this cohort is close to the preliminary ‘TDI’ for CIT (see above), we can conclude that CIT exposure in the Nigerian cohort does exceed the ‘level of no concern for nephrotoxicity’ set by EFSA for this mycotoxin. Thus, further biomonitoring studies and research on dietary sources of CIT in this country as well as other African countries are indicated.
Biomarkers of effect
A biomarker of effect is a measurable biochemical, physiological, behavioral or other alteration within an organism that, depending upon the magnitude, can be recognized as associated with an established or possible health impairment or disease (Choi et al. ). An aim of measuring biomarkers of effect (preferably along with biomarkers of exposure) is to detect early health effects in a population group that is at risk to harmful exposures (Angerer et al. ; Choi et al. ). So far, no biomarkers of effect have been introduced to assess possible consequences of CIT exposure in humans. Considering the leading toxicity in animal studies with CIT, the most relevant biomarkers of effects should be related to kidney injury. In this context, two animal studies with oral CIT dosing are of interest which determined such parameters: in pigs given oral doses of 1.0 and 20 mg/kg b.w. per day, the authors reported increased concentrations of glutamic oxalacetic transaminase, isocitric dehydrogenase and lactic dehydrogenase in serum and urine, before clinical signs of renal disease were evident (Szczech et al. ). In dogs, given an oral CIT dose 5 mg/kg b.w., a marked increase in activity of lactate dehydrogenase in urine was observed, before clinical signs of nephrotoxicity occurred (Carlton et al. ). One should note that CIT doses given to animals are far higher than exposures identified so far in human populations. Moreover, as biomarkers indicative of an effect are usually not specific for a given agent, it is mandatory in human monitoring to determine in parallel suitable biomarkers of exposure. This is exemplified by a study from Egypt which assessed renal injury in breast-fed infants with exposure to the more potent nephrotoxin OTA: in infants serum, the mean OTA concentrations was 1260 ± 1100 ng/L; interestingly, infant serum OTA levels of ≥ 2000 ng/L were associated with significantly higher levels of urinary β 2 -microglobulin and microalbuminuria than in those with lower OTA exposure (Hassan et al. ). As OTA is a frequent co-contaminant of CIT and infants are considered as susceptible subgroup of the population (Degen et al. ), biomonitoring studies on combined exposure to these mycotoxins and related undesirable effects are required.
Conclusions and recommendations
Although CIT biomonitoring data are still limited, the analysis of urinary biomarkers indicates widespread human exposure to this nephrotoxic mycotoxin. Biomonitoring data in different cohorts indicate geographical and inter-individual variations in the concentration of urinary CIT and its metabolite DH-CIT, with higher levels in Bangladeshi cohorts compared to European cohorts. The estimated CIT exposure in Bangladesh apparently varies by season, exceeding the ‘level of no concern for nephrotoxicity’ in winter season. Novel data on levels of CIT and its metabolite DH-CIT measured in urines from Nigeria indicate even higher CIT intake in this country, and raise concerns as the estimated exposure exceeds tolerable intake values. Biomonitoring results, along with data on kinetics in human volunteers and for individuals with multiple sampling of urine and plasma confirm determination of CIT and its metabolite DH-CIT as useful biomarkers to characterize human exposure. Advanced LC–MS/MS-based analytical methods and the recent synthesis of stable isotopically labeled standards can facilitate further biomonitoring studies, also in matrices such as breast milk to investigate CIT exposure of infants.
With no legal requirements for food surveillance (except for red mold rice), the data on dietary exposure to CIT is rather limited. But, recent advances in LC–MS/MS-based analytical techniques are likely to generate more data on the occurrence of CIT in food in the future. Main sources of dietary CIT intake should be identified, in order to protect populations at risk of exposure to potentially harmful levels and with a toxicologically relevant co-exposure to OTA.