Introduction
Cyanobacteria are a group of ubiquitous prokaryotes which developed the Earth’s aerobic biosphere via oxygenic photosynthesis (Yadav et al. ; Cardona et al. ). They are common inhabitants of freshwater lakes, rivers and reservoirs, and marine environments, as well as the illuminated surfaces of rocks and soils throughout the world. Cyanobacteria are able to tolerate extreme changes in salinity, temperature, desiccation and irradiance, which give them an extraordinary competitive advantage in these ecosystems (Chorus and Bartram ; Dantas et al. ; Whitton ). Furthermore, due to their ability to produce a diverse range of secondary metabolites (e.g. UV-protective pigments: scytonemin and mycosporine-like amino acids), this prokaryotic group successfully survives in extreme environmental conditions. Under favourable environmental conditions, cyanobacteria can attain high population densities in waterbodies (blooms), and may form visible scums on water surfaces (especially in eutrophic surface waters) and mats in shallow waters and along waterbody margins (Fogg et al. ; Codd ; Chorus and Bartram ; Whitton ; Huisman et al. ). In recent years, the increased anthropogenic eutrophication of water ecosystems has led to accelerated growth of cyanobacteria (Bláha et al. ). Moreover, consequences of global climate change are contributing to increases in the size, growth periods and spread of cyanobacterial populations (Codd et al. ; Bláhová et al. ; Bláha et al. ; Huisman et al. ).
The colours, odours and associations with animal intoxications (mammals, birds, fish) of cyanobacterial scums, blooms and mats have undoubtedly brought these microbes to human notice throughout history. Anecdotal references, long before the advent of microscopy, clearly allude to cyanobacterial (and perhaps microalgal) mass populations in waterbodies. Traditional folk awareness of blooms is apparent in Canada and Australia from before European colonization (Codd et al. ). In early Europe, the Roman naturalist, and military commander, Pliny the Elder, referred to apparent blooms in the River Dnieper in 77CE (Griffiths ). The aptly named “ Monasterium Viridis Stagnae ” in the twelfth century, alongside Soulseat Loch in Scotland, appears to refer to blooms and scums (Codd ) and William Shakespeare may have assumed that his English audiences would be familiar in the 1590s with his allusion to pond scum in his play, The Merchant of Venice (Fogg et al. ). The occurrence of windblown summer scums in the Tuchomskie Lake, northern Poland, was reported by Kirkby ( ), which are likely to have been of buoyant cyanobacteria (Codd et al. ). The continuing folk awareness of annual, episodic cyanobacterial bloom and scum phenomena is clearly apparent in the recognition of the “breaking of the meres” among communities around lakes (meres) in the northwest of England (Griffiths ). Thereafter, through time and space, there have been numerous described appearances of cyanobacterial scums and blooms. Eventually, people began to record and learn about the negative consequences of cyanobacteria and their metabolites.
Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites exhibit various types of biological activities, and some of them have been identified as potent toxins: cyanotoxins (Fig. 1 ). Cyanotoxins can cause adverse effects on humans, terrestrial animals, aquatic organisms, as well as on the environment (Codd et al. ; Sivonen and Jones ; Metcalf and Codd ; Janssen ). They are recognized as one of the most lethal groups of biotoxins known, presenting high risks of illness and mortality (Chorus and Bartram ; Codd et al. ). Fig. 1 Examples of molecular structures of commonly recognized cyanotoxins
A practice of classifying cyanobacterial mass populations as “toxic” or “non-toxic” has been developed without necessarily defining what is being meant by these terms. Since the toxicity of cyanobacterial components depends upon the presence and abundance of the substance(s) in question, the dose, exposure route and the target organism(s), it is necessary to specify these conditions when considering whether particular cyanobacterial compounds or blooms are “toxic” or “non-toxic” (Codd and Metcalf ). It should thus be borne in mind that most of the early surveys of cyanobacterial bloom and strain toxicity were determined by mouse intraperitoneal (i.p.) bioassay, and later by chemical analysis for the most commonly sought cyanotoxins, microcystins, with fewer analyses for, e.g. nodularins, anatoxins, saxitoxins and cylindrospermopsins (Carmichael , ; Codd et al. ). With the toxicity of cyanobacterial blooms and strains being defined as lethality by i.p. mouse bioassay, early surveys indicated an incidence of 25–75% (National Rivers Authority ; Codd ; Chorus ).
With reference to specific cyanotoxins, it is well established that differences exist between individual strains within species, between species in the same genus, and between genera: some biosynthesizing specific cyanotoxins, e.g. microcystins, and others not. With the exception of a structural role of the cyanobacterial lipopolysaccharide endotoxins as cell outer membrane components (Monteiro et al. ), the natural functions of cyanotoxins remain to be fully understood. It seems likely that no shared function can account for the biosynthesis of all of the remaining cyanotoxins and it is possible that multiple functions may account for the biosynthesis of a specific cyanotoxin (Codd et al. ). One reason for the biosynthesis of cyanotoxins may be an adaptation that allows cyanobacteria in resource-limiting environments to ameliorate competition with other phototrophs and inhibit their growth (Arnold ; Smayda ; Gross et al. ), and also that of heterotrophic bacteria (Flores and Wolk ), and fungi (Patterson and Bolis ). Recent data suggest that in addition to conferring competitive advantage, some cyanotoxins may have roles as cyanobacterial physiological aides (e.g. in assisting nutrient uptake, iron scavenging, in protection against oxidative stress and/or in carbon–nitrogen metabolism, the maintenance of homeostasis and other roles as info-chemicals) (Holland and Kinner ; Makower et al. ).
Based on toxicological target(s) and chemical structures, cyanotoxins can be classified into several main groups (Table 1 ) (Sivonen and Jones ; Metcalf and Codd ; Corbel et al. ; Sanchez et al. ). The hepatotoxins include small cyclic peptides (microcystins and nodularins), and the cytotoxins include alkaloids (e.g. cylindrospermopsins). There are several groups of cyanobacterial neurotoxins, classified according to structure: alkaloids (anatoxin-a, homoanatoxin-a and saxitoxins), non-proteinogenic amino acids, e.g. BMAA, and the phosphate ester, anatoxin-a(S). One of the most studied mechanisms of cyanotoxin hepatotoxicity is the inhibition of serine/threonine protein phosphatases, which affects the regulation of cellular protein hyperphosphorylation (Yoshizawa et al. ; Mackintosh et al. ). Mechanisms of neurotoxicity include neuromuscular blockade (Codd et al. ; Funari and Testai ), anti-acetylcholinesterase activity, anti-phosphatase activity, postsynaptic cholinergic agonist activity (Metcalf and Codd ) and protein kinase C activators (Fujiki et al. ). Table 1 Principle classes of cyanotoxins with summaries of modes of action, health effects, cyanobacterial producers and toxicities to mice Toxins/structure (number of known analogs) Mechanism of action and target organ Health effects Examples of toxigenic genera/species LD 50 (i.p. mouse, μg/kg b.w.) LD 50 (oral, μg/kg b.w.) References Hepatotoxins Microcystins/cyclic heptapeptides (~ 250) Irreversible inhibition of protein phosphatases (PP1, PP2A, PPP4, PPP5), membrane integrity and conductance disruption; primary site of action: liver (also affect other tissues—kidney, reproductive tissue, colon, brain) Nausea; vomiting; diarrhoea; renal damage; hepatotoxic; tumour promoters; death (in some cases)/immediate up to 24 h Microcystis, Anabaena, Nostoc, Planktothrix, Anabaenopsis, Aphanocapsa, Hapalosiphon, Aphanizomenon , Merismopedia , Oscillatoria , Phormidium , Synechococcus , Snowella , Arthrospira, Pleurocapsalean , Gloeotrichia, Fischerella , Radiocystis , Woronichinia MC-LR-50; MC-LA-50; MC-YR-70; MC-RR-300-600; ([(6Z)-Adda]MC-RR)-1000 MC-LR-5000 (Cr1:CD-1(ICR)BR mice); 10,900 (Balb/c mice); > 5000 (rats) Rinehart et al. ( ), Sivonen et al. ( ), Fawell et al. ( ), Yoshida et al. ( ), Mahakhant et al. ( ), dos Vieira et al. ( ), Ballot ( ), Botha et al. ( ), Ballot et al. ( ), Carey et al. ( ), Fiore et al. ( ), Chen et al. ( ), Spoof and Catherine ( ) Nodularins/cyclic pentapeptides (10) Inhibition of protein phosphatases (PP1 and PP2A); primary site of action: liver Hepatotoxic; tumour promoters; carcinogenic Nodularia, Nostoc 30–60 ND Sivonen et al. ( ), Ressom et al. ( ), Carmichael and Boyer ( ), Spoof and Catherine ( ) Cytotoxins Cylindrospermopsins/guanidine alkaloids (3) Irreversible inhibitor of protein biosynthesis, genotoxicity; primary site of action: liver (also to kidneys, spleen, lungs, heart, intestine, thymus, skin) Nausea; vomiting; bloody diarrhoea; kidney damage; headache; dehydration; genotoxic/up to a week Cylindrospermopsis , Anabaena, Aphanizomenon (ovalisporum), Raphidiopsis (curvata), Umezakia (natans), Oscillatoria , Sphaerospermopsis , Lyngbya (wollei), Chrysosporum (bergii), Anabaena (lapponica) 200 (6 days)–2100 (24 h) 4400–6900 (2–6 days) Ohtani et al. ( ), Li et al. ( ), Schembri et al. ( ), Svrcek and Smith ( ), Spoof et al. ( ), Seifert et al. ( ) Neurotoxins Anatoxin-a/alkaloids (8) Postsynaptic, depolarizing neuromuscular blockers, bind irreversibly to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors; primary site of action: nerve synapse Tingling in fingers and toes; dizziness; convulsions; paralysis; muscle fasciculation; gasping; death (in some cases)/immediate up to 1–2 h Aphanizomenon , Anabaena , Raphidiopsis, Microcystis , Oscillatoria , Planktothrix , Cylindrospermum , Arthrospira , Tychonema (bourrellyi) 200–375 >5000 Devlin et al. ( ), Carmichael and Gorham ( ), Sivonen et al. ( ), Fawell and James ( ), Fitzgeorge et al. ( ), Ressom et al. ( ), Sivonen and Jones ( ), Ballot ( ), Ballot et al. ( ), Van Apeldoorn et al. ( ), Shams et al. ( ), Carmichael and Boyer ( ) Homoanatoxin-a/alkaloids (1) Similar to anatoxin-a, causes potent neuromuscular blockade; primary site of action: nerve synapse Staggering; gasping; muscle fasciculation; convulsions; coma; cyanosis; hyper salivation; death Phormidium (Oscillatoria) formosa , Raphidiopsis mediterranea 250–330 ND Skulberg et al. ( ), Ressom et al. ( ), Codd et al. ( ), Namikoshi et al. ( ) Anatoxin-a(S)/guanidine methyl phosphate ester (1) Irreversibly inhibits acetylcholinesterase, nerve hyper-excitability; primary site of action: peripheral nervous system Hyper salivation; diarrhoea; paralysis; asphyxiation; decreased movement; exaggerated abdominal breathing; cyanosis; convulsions; and ultimately death. Survival time of 10–30 min Anabaena lemmermannii , A. flos - aquae , A. spiroides 20–40 ND Mahmood and Carmichael ( ), Matsunaga et al. ( ), Carmichael et al. ( ), Stewart ( ), Van Apeldoorn et al. ( ), Aráoz et al. ( ) Saxitoxins/carbamate alkaloids (56) Bind and block sodium channels inhibiting nerve axon conduction; primary site of action: nerve axons Numbness around mouth; spreading to arms and hands; respiratory muscle paralysis; difficulty breathing; death/immediate up to 24 h Aphanizomenon ( gracile ), Lyngbya ( wollei ), D . ( circinale ), Planktothrix , Phormidium uncinatum , Scytonema , Geitlerinema spp., Raphidiopsis ( brookii ), Cuspidothrix ( issatschenkoi ), Cylindrospermopsis ( raciborskii ) 5–30 263 Carmichael ( ), Humpage et al. ( ), Mons et al. ( ), Beltran and Neilan ( ), WHO ( ), Pearson et al. ( ), Wiese et al. ( ), Borges et al. ( ), Cirés and Ballot ( ) Dermatotoxins (irritants) Lyngbyatoxin/modified cyclic dipeptide (3) Protein kinase C activators; primary site of action: skin, gastrointestinal tract Inflammatory agents; dermatitis; necrosis; blisters; dermatotoxins; tumor promoters Lyngbya , Schizotrix , Oscillatoria 250 μg/kg (LD 100 ) ND Fujiki et al. ( ), Moore ( , ), Ito et al. ( ), Jiang et al. ( ), Carmichael and Boyer ( ) Aplysiatoxin/phenolic bislactones (> 2) Protein kinase C activators; primary site of action: skin Inflammatory agents; dermatitis; necrosis; blisters; dermatoxins; tumor promoters Lyngbya , Schizotrix , Oscillatoria 300 ND Fujiki et al. ( ), Moore ( ), Ito et al. ( ) Debromoaplysiatoxin/phenolic bislactones Inflammatory toxins operate through mechanisms similar to those of phorbol esters; primary site of action: skin Inflammatory agents; dermatitis; blisters and necrosis in mammals Lyngbya , Schizotrix , Oscillatoria 107–117 μg/kg ND Moore et al. ( ), Carmichael and Boyer ( ) Endotoxins (irritants) Lipopolysaccharides (LPS)/lipopolysaccharides (3) LPS form complexes with proteins and phospholipids; primary site of action: affects any exposed tissue (skin and mucosa) Inflammatory agents; headache; fever; skin irritations; gastrointestinal, allergic and respiratory reactions All cyanobacteria 40,000–190,000 ND Weise et al. ( ), Chorus and Bartram ( ), Stewart et al. ( ), Monteiro et al. ( ) Other toxins Non-proteinogenic amino acids, e.g. β- N -methylamino- l -alanine (BMAA) Potentiation and enhancement of motor neuron death; agonist for N -methyl- d -aspartate and glutamate R5 receptors; oxidative stress Potential neurodegenerative agents; neurotoxic Aphanizomenon , Cylindrospermopsis , Dolichospermum, Planktothrix (Oscillatoria), Microcystis , Nodularia , Synechococcus , Synechocystis ND ND Cox et al. ( ), Lobner et al. ( ), Carmichael and Boyer ( ) ND not determined
Illnesses associated with exposure to cyanotoxin-producing cyanobacterial blooms in recreational and drinking waters tend to have a range of symptoms including abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhoea, weakness, severe oral and gastrointestinal inflammation, irritation of skin and mucous membrane of the eyes, nose and throat, asthma-like symptoms, muscle tremors, nausea, tingling in fingertips and toes, blurred vision, headache, dizziness, fever, hypoxia, cyanosis, paralysis and respiratory or cardiac arrest, potentially resulting in death (Moore , ; Chorus and Bartram ; Metcalf and Codd ). Such effects can occur within minutes to days after exposure, depending on the types and concentration of cyanotoxins, exposure route(s), body weight and age of the affected persons.
Chronic exposure to cyanotoxins may present one of the factors responsible for carcinogenesis development. The results of some epidemiological and experimental studies suggest that cyanobacterial blooms, associated with other risk factors, may cause a higher incidence of some cancers (primary liver cancer, brain cancer, heart, mediastinum and pleural cancer, kidney cancer, ovarian cancer, testicular cancer, gastric cancer, colorectal cancer, retroperitoneal and peritoneal cancer, leukaemia, and malignant skin melanoma) (Yu ; Ueno et al. ; Zhou et al. ; Fleming et al. ; Milutinović et al. ; Žegura et al. ; Li et al. ; Svirčev et al. ). Long-term exposure to some amounts of cyanotoxins may be causally linked to neurodegenerative diseases in humans (Cox et al. ; Lobner et al. ; Holtcamp ; Delcourt et al. ) including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis–Parkinsonism–dementia complex (ALS/PDC) although further research is needed to verify this. In addition to the impact on animals and humans, cyanotoxins can also exert harmful effects on other biota including invertebrates (e.g. Blom et al. ; Metcalf et al. ) and plants, such as leaf necrosis, inhibition of photosynthesis and growth, and oxidative stress (Kós et al. ; Kurki-Helasmo and Meriluoto ; McElhiney et al. ; M-Hamvas et al. ; Drobac et al. ).
The aim of this review is to collect and summarize the available, detailed data on the occurrence of cyanotoxins throughout the world and on the human and animal poisonings associated with particular cyanotoxins. This was achieved through (1) analyses and evaluation of available literature from refereed international journals, conference-, technical- and situation-assessment reports; (2) a review of the distribution of well-known cyanotoxins: microcystins (MC), nodularins (NOD), cylindrospermopsins (CYN), anatoxins (ATX) and saxitoxins (STX), throughout the continents; (3) summary of the human and animal poisonings attributed to cyanotoxin exposure via drinking water supplies, water-based recreational activities and haemodialysis; (4) interpretation of the findings; and (5) making conclusions and recommendations concerning the need for future research.
Description of workflow and classification of publications
An extensive literature review was performed to investigate the presence of the most commonly found cyanotoxins in various freshwater ecosystems worldwide, as well as numerous cases of associated human and animal poisonings. To achieve this goal, the first step was to examine a wide range of environmental and other scientific literature via the Scopus database which includes PubMed, Web of Science and Science Direct. Searches were performed using the following key words: “cyanotoxin”, “microcystin”, “nodularin”, “cylindrospermopsin”, “anatoxin”, “saxitoxin”, and “poisoning”, “intoxication”, “incident”, “death”, “mortality”, “health”, “health effects”, “adverse effects”, “exposure”, “drinking water”, and “recreation”. Cyanotoxins are comprised of a wide number of compounds including their structural variants. To simplify representation of some well-known cyanotoxins and their distribution, variants were included in an appropriate cyanotoxin group.
In step two, a review of the individual results was carried out to assess and determine their relevance to the topic of this manuscript. The number of identified articles (step three), through data processing and quality assessment until February 2018, is presented in Fig. 2 . Publications that were not included in the scope of the study consisted of (a) investigations performed under experimental conditions in the absence of field investigations or intoxication events; (b) publications of some lesser known cyanotoxins (e.g. BMAA and dermatotoxins) and other cyanobacterial toxic metabolites; (c) uncharacterized toxic metabolites whose molecular structure has not been determined; (d) papers about cyanotoxins from ecosystems other than freshwater, including cyanotoxin occurrences in some extreme environments; and (e) news, reports and other unverified online data. Fig. 2 Search strategy for the systematic review of cyanotoxin occurrence and poisoning incidents
Previous refereed review papers were considered relevant, as well as papers dealing with similar scope but which did not contain key information (e.g. ecosystems were not defined, reports of other, less known cyanotoxins, etc.); therefore, they were not analysed further (step four). Such systematic and large-scale investigations on cyanotoxin occurrences from 12 different countries have been presented and summarized in Table 2 . These papers present valuable information on 2250 different freshwater ecosystems where identification of MCs was most often found; however, individual blooming ecosystems could not be associated with cyanotoxin identifications in some cases (e.g. in Germany 15 MCs were isolated from 11 unspecified lakes and reservoirs). Therefore, these data are important for the scope of this overview but could not be presented on the global and particular maps. Table 2 Cyanobacterial and cyanotoxin occurrence in some countries based on the publications with incomplete information required for database Investigated period Country, ecosystem (lakes, reservoirs, rivers) Species reported Toxin(s) detected References 1989–1992 Portugal 12 samples: 2 natural lakes, 2 Iberian rivers and 5 reservoirs Microcystis aeruginosa , Microcystis wesenbergii , Anabaena flos - aquae , Nostoc sp. 7 different toxins isolated: MC-LR, -RR, -YR, [D-Asp3]MCYST-LR, MCYST-HilR, [L-MeSer]MCYST-LR and [DhaT] MCYST-LR Vasconcelos et al. ( ) 1995–1996 Germany 11 lakes and reservoirs Microcystis spp., Planktothrix aghardhii , Planktothrix rubescens 15 MCs isolated: MC-RR, MC-YR, MC-LR, [D-Asp 3 ] MC-LR, [D-Asp 3 ] MC-RR, [D-Asp 3 ] MC-YR, [D-Asp 3 , Dha 7 ] MC-LR, [Dha 7 ] MC-RR, [Dha 7 ] MC-YR, MC-WR, [D-Asp 3 ] MC-HtyR, [H 4 ] MC-YR Fastner et al. ( ) August 1996–October 1997 South Korea 10 large reservoirs Microcystis spp. MC Kim et al. ( ) October 1997–June 1999 Australia 47 reservoirs and weir pools Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (recorded in 22 of 24 reservoirs and in 13 of 23 weir pools sampled), Limnothrix aff. redekei , Pseudanabaena limnetica , Planktolyngbya subtilis CYN McGregor and Fabbro ( ) 1999 Germany 400 samples from eight ecoregions, 325 analysed for cyanobacteria, 155 lakes 55% contained cyanobacteria populations and 26% contained toxigenic cyanobacteria ( M. aeruginosa , Planktothrix sp., Limnothrix sp.) MC (MC-LR, MC-RR, MC-YR) Frank ( ) N/S Czech Republic 8 water treatment plants (40 samples in total) Oscillatoria spp., Phormidium autumnale MC-LR 61% of raw and 38% of treated waters contained detectable Bláha and Maršálek ( ) 2002 Bangladesh 79 ponds Microcystis , Planktothrix , Anabaena , Oscillatoria sp., Merismopedia sp., Pseudanabaena sp., Anabaenopsis sp., Aphanizomenon sp. MCs (MC-RR, MC-YR, MC-LR) in 39 ponds Welker et al. ( ) May–September 2000–2001 USA 241 lakes in Missouri, Iowa, northeastern Kansas, and southern Minnesota (800 lake visits) Anabaena , Coelosphaerium , Microcystis , Oscillatoria MC Graham et al. ( ) Mid-July and August 2003 and 2004 Czech Republic 18 eutrophic, recreational, and/or drinking water reservoirs Microcystis spp. ( M. aeruginosa, M. viridis , M. ichthyoblabe , M. flos - aquae , M. wesenbergii) , Woronichinia naegeliana , Anabaena (A. lemmermannii, A. flos - aquae , A. crassa , A. circinalis , A. spiroides , A. mendotae , A. planctonica) , Aphanizomenon (Aph. klebahnii, Aph. yezoense , Aph. flos - aquae , Aph. issatschenkoi) , Planktothrix agardhii MC (MC-LR, MC-RR, MC-YR) MCs detected in 90% of the samples Znachor et al. ( ) Summer 2003 USA 33 lake and reservoir raw water sources (206 samples + 77 effluents) reservoirs, dams, creeks, lakes N/S MC-LR equiv. in 7% of the samples (14 samples) Haddix et al. ( ) July–September 2004 Czech Republic 94 water reservoirs (206 water samples collected)—27 for drinking water supply Microcystis spp., M. aeruginosa, M. wesenbergii , Woronichinia spp., Planktothrix spp., Aphanizomenon spp., Cylindrospermopsis spp. MC detected in 70% of all samples (145 waters) Bláhová et al. ( ) June–September 2005 Germany 21 lakes (115 samples) C. raciborskii , Anabaena bergii , Anabaena spp., Anabaenopsis spp., Aphanizomenon spp., Aph. gracile , Aph. flos - aquae , Aph. aphanizomenoides , Aph. issatschenkoi , Raphidiopsis mediterranea , Planktothrix agardhii CYN detected in 19 lakes (102 samples) Rücker et al. ( ) May and October 2007 USA 1161 lakes Anabaena, Anabaenopsis , Aphanizomenon , Aphanocapsa, Coelosphaerium, Cylindrospermum , Cylindrospermopsis, Leptolyngbya , Limnothrix , Lyngbya , Microcystis , Nodularia, Oscillatoria , Phormidium, Planktolyngbya, Planktothrix, Pseudanabaena, Raphidiopsis, Snowella , Synechococcus , Synechocystis CYN, MC, STX, ATX, NOD Loftin et al. ( ) July 2011–March 2012 China 25 urban reservoirs for drinking water supply in Dongguan City of South China (86 samples) C. raciborskii , Raphidiopsis sp., Limnothrix sp. ( Limnothrix redekei ), Microcystis sp. CYN detected in more than one half of the reservoirs MCs detected in 12 reservoirs Lei et al. ( ) 1930–2012 Serbia 65 freshwaters (4 canals, 4 multi-use reservoirs, 6 lakes, 7 ponds, 8 fishponds, 11 reservoirs for irrigation, 12 reservoirs for drinking water supply, 13 rivers) M. aeruginosa, Aphanizomenon flos - aquae, Oscillatoria agardhii , Microcystis flos - aquae , Oscillatoria rubescens , Anabaena flos - aquae , Anabaena solitaria , Pseudanabaena limnetica , Anabaena spiroides , Gomphosphaeria lacustris , Microcystis wesenbergii , Phormidium foveolarum , Anabaena circinalis , Gomphosphaeria saponina , Jaaginema subtilissimum , Microcystis viridis , C. raciborskii MC Svirčev et al. ( , ) 2013 USA Puget Sound area lakes Anabaena spp., Microcystis spp. MC Preece et al. ( ) 2009–2014 USA Washington lakes Anabaena , Aphanizomenon , Microcystis , Gloeotrichia MC, ATX, CYN, STX Trainer and Hardy ( ) June 2014 USA 75 wadeable streams, Piedmont region 24 March 1993 and 14 September 2011: Leptolyngbya sp. (33%), Phormidium sp. (27%), Pseudanabaena sp. (15%), Anabaena sp. (9.9%) MC Loftin et al. ( ) 1980–2014 Uruguay 64 ecosystems Microcystis spp. MC, STX, CYN Bonilla et al. ( ) 2000–2015 Bulgaria 120 waterbodies 210 taxa (207 species, 1 variety and 2 forms) from 69 genera of Cyanoprokaryota: Dolichospermum spiroides , Dolichospermum scheremetieviae , M. wesenbergii , Aph. flos - aquae , Aph. klebahni , Aph. gracile , Snowella lacustris , Limnococcus limneticus , Cuspidothrix issatschenkoi , Planktolyngbya limnetica , Pseudanabaena catenata , Raphidiopsis mediterranea , Planktothrix agardhii , C. raciborskii MC, NOD, STX Stoyneva-Gärtner et al. ( ) 2015–2016 Turkey 18 selected waterbodies: 7 natural lakes, 8 reservoirs, 1 lagoon, 2 coastal and transitional waters Anabaena minderi , Anabaena recta , Anabaena sp., Anabaenopsis elenkinii , Aphanizomenon sp., Aphanizomenon spp. , Aph. flos - aquae , Chrysosporum ovalisporum , Cuspidothrix issatschenkoi , C. raciborskii , D. flos - aquae , D. mendotae , Microcystis spp., M. aeruginosa, Nodularia spumigena , Oscillatoria sp., Planktothrix sp., Planktothrix agardhii , Planktothrix rubescens , Sphaerospermopsis aphanizomenoides MC, CYN Koker et al. ( ) N/S not stated
Publications that contained most of the necessary information (e.g. investigated freshwater ecosystem and geographical location, cyanotoxins and cyanobacteria identified, symptoms/effects manifested with possible causal connections to cyanobacteria/cyanotoxins) were found to be acceptable and were retained for final analysis (step five). The chosen literature consisted mostly of published, peer-reviewed scientific papers, rather than conference proceedings, books, newspaper articles, Ph.D. dissertations, Master and Bachelor theses. The acceptable publications regarding cyanotoxin occurrence and poisoning incidents (468) were analysed within an internal database used for the production of this paper (in the text referred to as database). Although the database contains a large amount of information, the focus of this study was solely on the cyanotoxin occurrences and poisoning incidents. Therefore, the database could represent the basis for different studies as well, such as analysis of potentially toxic cyanobacterial species, more detailed statistics, and freshwater ecosystem distribution. All of the acceptable articles were classified according to publication date and continent, and are presented in Table 3 . Table 3 Classification of references accepted and presented in database Period Africa Asia Australia and New Zealand Europe North and Central America South America Total Total Poison. Total Poison. Total Poison. Total Poison. Total Poison. Total Poison. Total Poison. …–1949 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 6 6 0 0 8 8 1950–1999 11 11 14 7 25 23 32 22 27 25 14 7 123 95 2000–2018 43 7 64 9 25 8 96 17 60 23 49 10 337 74 Total 55 19 78 16 51 32 128 39 93 54 63 17 468 177 poison. publications with reported poisoning cases, total total number of references (cyanotoxin distribution and reported poisoning cases)
Based on the selected references from the database, the number of publications on cyanotoxins appears to have increased exponentially over recent decades. Most papers have dealt with the ecosystems and cyanobacterial problems found in European countries, mostly in recent decades. 38% (177 out of 468) of the papers reported poisoning cases involving animals and/or humans. Until 1949, authors appear to have reported poisoning incidents only. In the period from 1950 to 1999, the vast majority of the publications dealt with poisoning cases, except in Asia, Europe, and South America. On the other hand, recently only 22% (74 out of 337) of the papers documented and presented cyanobacterial poisoning cases with more emphasis on the reports of cyanotoxin occurrence. In Australia and New Zealand, 63% (32 out of 51) of all reported references to the occurrence of the cyanobacteria dealt with associated poisonings. Conversely, in Asia, only 21% (16 out of 78) of the publications dealt with poisoning cases; in South America 27% (17 out of 63), and in Europe 30% (39 out of 128).
Several important findings were made during production this manuscript based on the formed database that should be clarified. There were 468 acceptable articles; 1118 recorded cyanotoxin identifications (MCs, CYNs, ATXs, STXs, NODs) or reports where cyanotoxins were not analysed or specified (UR, N/A) (sometimes more than one cyanotoxin was identified in one ecosystem at different times); 183 recorded cyanotoxin poisonings of humans and/or animals; 869 investigated freshwater ecosystems (some were investigated more than once by different authors or at different point in time); 1017 inputs in the database are presented in supplementary tables (S1–S6) that refer to the different freshwater ecosystems that were investigated with complete data at one point in time.
The publications and findings related to the presence of cyanotoxins and poisonings are presented on the maps of continents and subcontinents and in several supplementary tables (S1–S6) and are further discussed in the following sections.
Distribution of cyanotoxins on a global scale
An investigation on global cyanotoxin distribution presents a daunting task since it includes review of a very large number of publications. Constant progress in science together with the increased concerns associated with cyanobacterial blooms have undoubtedly contributed to the increase in the number of publications on cyanotoxins over recent decades (from about hundred to three hundred articles per year since the 1990s) (e.g. Merel et al. ). In December 2012, the Thomson Reuters Web of Science database retrieved 18,642 publications related to cyanobacteria, of which 20% were related to cyanobacterial blooms. In the same period, 5293 publications were related to cyanotoxins, but these publications were mostly unevenly distributed between the different toxins (Merel et al. ). The first publications from the 1960s focussed on STX and ATX. In the 1980s, articles on NODs and MCs started to appear, while the first articles on CYN were published during the 1990s (Merel et al. ). The vast majority of published cyanotoxin articles have focused on MCs (56%), then STXs (27%), followed by NODs and ATX (9%), CYN (7%) and other toxins (BMAA, lyngbyatoxin, aplysiatoxin less than 2%). These publications cover over 100 research areas, including toxicology (24%), ecology (19%), chemistry (18%), pharmacology (17%), water biology, molecular biology (13%), engineering, water resources (7%), the economy, public health and epidemiology (5%). A dozen authors are associated with 11% of the overall literature, and most of the articles (98%) were published in English. Taking into account the size of national populations, then productivity (if defined as simply the number of refereed publications) is high in the smaller countries of Western Europe, but is low in the USA, Japan and China. If the number of universities is also taken into account, then Australia and Finland have the highest publication rates. Based on the economic level of the country, African countries emerge ahead of USA or other European countries, only Finland and Australia remain among the most productive. With reference to citation and H-index per country, it appears that the publications from the countries with the highest cyanotoxin publication outputs are also the countries which have generated the papers of highest impact (Merel et al. ).
Recent publication searches using the keyword phrase “cyanotoxins” were performed in several databases. The numbers of papers found in 2018 were Scopus database: 1231; Google Scholar: 1190; Science Direct: 286; PubMed: 94; Wiley Online Library: 54 results. The number of selected papers from this research was 468, dating from 1931 to February 2018 when this analysis of the published data began. However, a series of new papers has been published since February 2018 indicating the further appearance of cyanotoxins, for instance, in Ethiopia (Major et al. ), Brazil (Lorenzi et al. ; Walter et al. ), USA (Beversdorf et al. ), England (Turner et al. ) and Armenia (Minasyan et al. ).
Most of the research on cyanotoxins has been done on defining their chemistry, toxinology and toxicology, while a worldwide effort to map their occurrence and associated environmental health risks has been lacking (Carmichael ). Here we present the geographical distribution of the five most commonly found cyanotoxins (MCs, CYNs, ATXs, STXs, and NODs) throughout the world. All of the data are presented in separated maps, describing cyanotoxin occurrence on the different continents and subcontinents, as well as the most commonly observed cyanobacterial genera or species and the freshwater ecosystems in which they were found.
Africa
The dominant cyanotoxins reported from Africa were MCs (77%; 77 out of 100) which were found in 14 countries and in 76 freshwater ecosystems, predominantly lakes, reservoirs and ponds (30, 16, 11, respectively) (Fig. 3 ; APPENDIX S5). In addition to MCs, four other groups of cyanotoxins were also detected, but in negligible percentages: ATXs 9%, NODs 3%, CYNs 2%, and STX 1%. The highest number of waterbodies where ATXs were detected was in Kenya, than in Nigeria. STX was identified in only one African freshwater ecosystem (in Nigeria) together with MC and ATX, although cyanobacterial species known to be potential saxitoxin producers have been previously identified in Africa (APPENDIX S5). The most common genera identified (number of reports in parentheses) in freshwater ecosystems in Africa were Microcystis spp. (79), Anabaena spp. (35), Oscillatoria spp. (23), Cylindrospermopsis spp. (17) and Planktothrix spp. (13). Fig. 3 Geographical distribution of the most commonly reported cyanotoxins in Africa
Asia
Cyanotoxins were found in 15 countries, in 131 freshwater ecosystems, predominantly lakes, ponds and reservoirs (67, 24, and 24, respectively) (Fig. 4 ; APPENDIX S2). MCs (79%; 132 out of 168) were the most commonly found cyanotoxins in freshwater ecosystems in Asia. Cyanotoxins identified in Asia also have included CYNs (10%), ATXs (3%), NODs (3%), and STXs (1%). ATX was mostly reported in South Korea, but only once in China, Qatar, and Japan; CYN has been found mostly in Thailand, but also in Taiwan, Japan, Turkey, China and Saudi Arabia. NOD was found in Turkey and Taiwan, while STXs were detected only once in China and Russia. The most common genera identified (number of reports in parentheses) in freshwater ecosystems in Asia were Microcystis spp. (162), Anabaena spp. (79), Oscillatoria spp. (52), Aphanocapsa spp. (33), and Nostoc spp. (30). Fig. 4 Geographical distribution of the most commonly reported cyanotoxins in Asia
Australia and New Zealand
Cyanotoxins were found in Australia with New Zealand, in 106 freshwater ecosystems, predominantly lakes, rivers and ponds (66, 19, and 10, respectively) (Fig. 5 ; APPENDIX S6). MCs were the commonly found cyanotoxins (55%; 91 out 166), with dominance in the freshwater ecosystems of New Zealand. In addition to MCs, other detected cyanotoxins were: STXs (21%), CYNs (8%), ATXs (5%) and NOD (4%). The most common genera identified (number of reports in parentheses) in freshwater ecosystems in Australia were Microcystis spp. (72), Anabaena spp. (60), Phormidium spp. (13), Nodularia spp. (13) and Cylindrospermopsis spp. (7). Fig. 5 Geographical distribution of the most commonly reported cyanotoxins in Australia and New Zealand
Europe
Based on the collected data, cyanotoxins were identified in 273 European freshwater ecosystems within 25 countries (Fig. 6 ; APPENDIX S1). The cyanotoxins were predominantly found in lakes (188). MCs were the most commonly detected cyanotoxins across European freshwater ecosystems (58%; 198 out of 341). CYN (18%) was found most often in waters of Poland and Germany, but also in Greece, Portugal, Spain, Italy, the Czech Republic, and Serbia, while STXs (10%) were identified in Poland, and also in Greece, Serbia, Finland, Bulgaria, France, Portugal and Spain. ATXs (10%) were predominantly detected in lakes and rivers in Italy, then in Portugal, Denmark, Netherlands, France, Germany, Ireland, Bulgaria, the UK, Poland, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. The least represented cyanotoxins were NODs (1%), mostly found in freshwater ecosystems in Bulgaria, Finland and Greece. The most common genera identified (number of reports in parentheses) in freshwater ecosystems in Europe were Microcystis spp. (203), Anabaena spp. (130), Planktothrix spp. (85), Aphanizomenon spp. (71) and Phormidium spp. (28). Fig. 6 Geographical distribution of the most commonly reported cyanotoxins in Europe
North America and Central America
Cyanotoxins were found in 4 countries in North and Central America, within 204 freshwater ecosystems, predominantly lakes (156) (Fig. 7 ; APPENDIX S4). MCs (57%; 135 out of 238) were the most frequently detected cyanotoxins in North and Central America. MCs were found in freshwater ecosystems in several USA States, in Mexico, Guatemala, and in Canada. ATXs, CYNs and STXs (15%, 4%, and 3%, respectively) were also detected in freshwater ecosystems. ATXs was mostly found in freshwater ecosystems in Washington and Nebraska, then singularly in Idaho, Oregon, Florida, California, Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Montana, and New York State, while STXs were detected in water reservoirs in Canada, Ohio, Alabama, Guatemala and Mexico. So far, NODs do not appear to have been reported in cyanobacterial blooms in North America. However, Nodularia blooms have been noted in lakes in western parts of North America and saline lakes on the American prairies (Galat et al. ; Reuter et al. ; Gerrath ; Oliva et al. ), suggesting that NODs could be found in the future. The most common genera identified (number of reports in parentheses) in freshwater ecosystems in North and Central America were Microcystis spp. (87), Anabaena spp. (69), Aphanizomenon spp. (19), Lyngbya spp. (9) and Cylindrospermopsis spp. (22). Fig. 7 Geographical distribution of the most commonly reported cyanotoxins in North and Central America
South America
In South America, cyanotoxins were found in 6 countries, in 79 freshwater ecosystems, predominantly reservoirs (22) and lakes (13) (Fig. 8 ; APPENDIX S3). MCs were the most commonly found cyanotoxins in South America (63%; 66 out of 105), with the highest distribution in Brazil, but also in Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay. STXs were predominantly reported from Brazil (13%). Furthermore, a few findings of ATXs (7%) were also detected only in Brazil, while CYN (3%) was found only in this South American country. There are apparently no reports of NOD presence in freshwater ecosystems in South America, although Nodularia sp. has been detected in Brazil and Uruguay (Oliva et al. ). The most common genera identified (number of reports in parentheses) in freshwater ecosystems in South America were Microcystis spp. (66), Anabaena spp. (24), Cylindrospermopsis spp. (22), Aphanizomenon spp. (10) and Pseudanabaena spp. (6). Fig. 8 Geographical distribution of the most commonly reported cyanotoxins in South America
Summary and interpretation of reported cyanotoxin distribution data throughout the world
This extensive literature review on the presence of the most commonly reported cyanotoxins in various freshwater ecosystems worldwide has included six continents, and 66 countries, mostly European (38%). The assessment was performed on 869 freshwater ecosystems, mostly lakes (60%; 520 out of 869 freshwater ecosystems), then reservoirs (13%), ponds (8%), and rivers (8%). The remaining freshwater ecosystems were either not specified or belonged to some other type of freshwater ecosystem. There were a total of 1017 inputs in the database, which relates to the number of reported investigations in each ecosystem at one point in time (see supplementary tables S1–S6). The most commonly reported cyanobacterial genera, globally, were Microcystis spp. (669 reportings), then Anabaena spp. (397), Aphanizomenon spp. (100), Planktothrix spp. (98) and Oscillatoria spp. (75). It should be noted that some previous Oscillatoria species are now classified in the Planktothrix genus. These most widely reported genera contain multiple species known to be potentially toxic.
The total number of recorded cyanotoxin investigations in the database was 1118, and the commonly identified cyanotoxins were MCs (63%; 699 out of 1118), while the other reported cyanotoxins were CYNs, ATXs, STXs, and NODs (10%, 9%, 8%, 2%, respectively) (Fig. 9 ). Fig. 9 Global distribution of reported cyanotoxins
The distribution of reported cyanotoxins in each continent is presented in Table 4 . MCs appear to be the most widespread group of cyanotoxins in each continent. CYNs are most often reported in Europe, then in Asia, Australia and New Zealand, and ATXs in North and Central America. STXs are mostly reported in Australia and New Zealand, as well as NODs. Table 4 Summary of reported cyanotoxin identifications per continent Cyanotoxins Africa Asia Australia and New Zealand Europe North and Central America South America Globe MCs 77% 79% 55% 58% 57% 63% 699 (63%) CYNs 2% 10% 8% 18% 4% 3% 107 (10%) ATXs 9% 3% 5% 10% 15% 7% 100 (9%) STXs 1% 3% 21% 10% 3% 13% 93 (8%) NODs 3% 1% 4% 1% 0% 0% 19 (2%) UR 4% 3% 5% 1% 14% 11% 67 (6%) N/A 4% 1% 2% 0% 8% 3% 33 (3%) Total number of cyanotoxins reported 100 168 166 341 238 105 1118 The data are presented as absolute numbers and relative values (percentages), respectively ATX anatoxin-a, CYN cylindrospermopsin, MC microcystins, NOD nodularin, STX saxitoxins, N/A toxic cyanobacterial metabolites not analysed, UR unknown reasons (group of cyanotoxins was not specified)
There are some differences in the occurrence of cyanotoxin groups which could be attributed to the particular characteristics of each continent, resulting from geographic location and climate, the freshwater ecosystems investigated and presence of different cyanobacterial species. However, the target of most previous studies has been the MCs. Therefore, it is feasible that the number of ecosystems containing other cyanotoxins has been underestimated.
Historical overview of cyanotoxins poisonings episodes
Although the chemical structures of most cyanotoxins have only been known for the last 30–40 years, the first reported cases of likely and demonstrated cyanobacteria-associated poisonings involving humans and animals are much older (Francis ; Metcalf and Codd ). Several reports describing noxious effects of toxic cyanobacteria originate from the 1930s and the number of poisoning reports has been steadily increasing ever since.
Various toxic cyanobacterial metabolites are produced by cyanobacterial strains with the potential to cause ecotoxicological problems and health issues (Metcalf and Codd ). Routes of exposure to toxic cyanobacterial blooms may be via ingestion of contaminated drinking water (Falconer ); contaminated fish (Ferrão-Filho ) or shellfish (Eriksson et al. ); food and dietary supplements (Codd et al. ; Gilroy et al. ; Lawrence et al. ; Hoeger and Dietrich ); recreational use of lakes and rivers (Pilotto et al. ); inhalation of aerosols (Wood and Dietrich ; Metcalf et al. ); irrigation of agricultural products with contaminated water (Codd et al. ; McElhiney et al. ); terrestrial food chains (Metcalf et al. ); inhalation of terrestrial cyanobacterial crust particles (Metcalf et al. ); and haemodialysis (Azevedo et al. ).
MCs and ATXs have been the cyanotoxins most often associated with human and animal intoxications, due to their implications in the majority of cyanotoxin occurrences reported so far, and to their wide distribution (see “ Distribution of cyanotoxins on a global scale ”). Cases of human and animal illnesses after exposure to toxic cyanobacteria through drinking and recreational waters have been documented worldwide (Table 5 ), with gastroenteritis being the most common outcome but also with hay fever-like symptoms and dermal irritation having been recorded. Hepatotoxicosis and neurotoxicity are the most common syndromes caused by swallowed or inhaled cyanobacteria. Potential consequences of cyanotoxin exposure range from mere nuisances to serious health problems in humans and animals, including fatal outcomes (Jochimsen et al. ; Pouria et al. ). Table 5 Human and animal poisonings associated with cyanobacteria Year Location (source) Cyanobacteria Toxin(s) Health outcomes References Drinking water 1878 Lake Alexandrina, Australia Nodularia spumigena NOD-like cyanotoxins Several livestock deaths (within hours); livestock stupor; unconsciousness; convulsions; liver damage Francis ( ) 1931 Elk River, Kanawha River, WV, USA Anabaena flos - aquae N/A Animals: fish deaths Humans: gastrointestinal illness among thousands (9000) of people receiving drinking water from rivers Veldee ( ) 1931 Ohio River, USA M. aeruginosa N/A 5000–8000 persons: gastroenteritis; abdominal pain; vomiting. Drinking water treatment by precipitation, filtration and chlorination was not sufficient to remove the toxins or toxic principles Tisdale ( ) 1931 Charleston, WV, USA Cyanobacteria species N/A The drinking water treatment process used (precipitation, filtration, chlorination) was ineffective against this bloom. Serious human poisoning Miller and Tisdale ( ) 1942 Reservoir Vaal Dam, South Africa M. flos - aquae N/A Poisoning of animals (horses, mules, donkeys, dogs, hares, poultry and waterbirds) Steyn ( ) 1960–1965 Salisbury (now Harare), Zimbabwe, Africa M. aeruginosa N/A Gastroenteritis; skin rashes; itching and sore eyes in children. Drinking water supply without proper drinking water purification process Zilberg ( ) 1968 USA Mass development of cyanobacteria, M. aeruginosa N/A Numerous cases of human gastrointestinal illness after exposure to mass developments of cyanobacteria Schwimmer and Schwimmer ( ) 1973–1974 Reservoir Hartbeespoort Dam, Africa M. aeruginosa MC Affected animals: cattle deaths Toerien et al. ( ) 1974–1975 Earthen dam on a farm in Broomehill district, Australia Nodularia spumigena N/A Sheep died and showed haemorrhage and diffuse liver necrosis after drinking water Main et al. ( ) 1974 Belgrano Park Pond (Santa Fe City), Argentina M. aeruginosa N/A Massive fish deaths Humans: gastrointestinal disorders, dermatitis, otitis and conjunctivitis in bathers and swimmers were associated with the bloom Apesteguia et al. ( ) 1974–1994 Alpine Lakes, Switzerland Phormidium limosa , Phormidium tenuis , Tychonema sp., Pseudanabaena catenata , P. autumnale UR Cattle deaths, liver damage Mez et al. ( ) 1977–1996 Haining city, China Microcystis MC Humans: colorectal cancer, deaths Zhou et al. ( ) 1979 Barakologadi Game Reserve, Odi district of Bophuthatswana, South Africa M . aeruginosa N/A Suspected Microcystis poisoning 3 (of 4) white rhinoceroses died: acute hepatotoxicity Hepatomegaly with haemorrhage and severe liver necrosis, numerous ecchymoses and petechiae in the subcutaneous tissue and subserosa of the thorax, abdomen and diaphragm Soll and Williams ( ) 1979 Reservoir on Palm Island Solomon Dam Palm Island, Australia C . raciborskii (300,000 cells per ml), Anabaena circinalis CYN 149 persons; gastroenteritis; vomiting; headache; liver, kidney and intestine damage. Treating bloom in a drinking water reservoir with copper sulphate led to liberation of toxins Byth ( ), Bourke et al. ( ), Hawkins et al. ( ), Hawkins ( ), Ohtani et al. ( ), Hawkins and Griffiths ( ), Griffiths and Saker ( ) 1980 Vaal Dam, Africa M. aeruginosa MC Affected animals: cattle deaths Scott et al. ( ) 1981 Reservoir Malpas Dam, Armidale, Australia M . aeruginosa MC Humans: liver damage. Cyanobacterial cells passing through water treatment process leading to re-growth in the open post-treatment drinking water tanks Falconer et al. ( ), Botes et al. ( ) 1981–1984 Haimen city, China Oscillatoria agardhii , Anabaena sp., A. flos - aquae MC Humans: primary liver cancer Yu ( ), Ueno et al. ( ) 1985 USA Mass developments of cyanobacteria N/A Humans: nausea; vomiting; diarrhoea; fever and eye; ear and throat infections Carmichael ( ) 1987 Eastern Transvaal, South Africa M. aeruginosa MC Affected animals; deaths of 47 cattle Scott ( ) 1988 Itaparica Dam reservoir, Brazil Microcystis sp., Anabaena sp. UR Humans: 2000 cases of gastroenteritis; diarrhoea; including 88 deaths, occurred in a 42-day period. People became sick after drinking boiled water from the dam Teixeira et al. ( ) 1988 Lake Richmond, VA, USA A. flos - aquae , Aphanizomenon flos - aquae , Microcystis ATX-a(S) Livestock, birds, dogs, fish Mahmood et al. ( ) 1989 Reservoir Bloemhof Dam, Sandveld Nature Reserve (Free State), South Africa M. aeruginosa MC Affected animals; seven giraffe deaths Theron ( ) 1989 Reservoir Klipdrif Dam, South Africa M. aeruginosa MC Affected animals; livestock Theron ( ) 1990–1991 Darling River, Australia Microcystis , Anabaena circinalis STX, NSTX Livestock, deaths. Copper sulphate was applied to lyse the organisms and to control taste and odour formation Humpage et al. ( ) 1990 and 1991 Loch Insh, Scotland, UK Oscillatoria sp. ATX-a Dog, deaths Edwards et al. ( ) 1991–1992 Australia Anabaena sp. UR Humans: 26 cases (aged 1–64 years) with skin diseases and multiple systemic symptoms associated with exposure (some via drinking water) to river water which was stored in open tanks El Saadi and Cameron ( ) 1992 Dams and waterholes property in the McKinley Shire Dam, northern Queensland, Australia Heavy growth of C. raciborskii CYN Cattle: weakness, hepatoxicity. Death of three cows and ten calves Thomas et al. ( ) 1981, 1982, 1983, 1985 Lake Black, Kootenai Country Idaho, ID, USA A. flos - aquae ATX-a Dogs, cattle, deer deaths Kann and Falter ( ) 1992–1995 Reservoir Cascade, Valley, ID, USA Anabaena spiroides , M. aeruginosa MC 23 cattle deaths Jacoby and Kann ( ) 1992–1995 Lake American, WA, USA A. flos - aquae ATX-a 11 animal poisonings, 5 cat deaths Jacoby and Kann ( ) 1992–1995 Lake Clear, WA, USA A. flos - aquae ATX-a Several dog deaths Jacoby and Kann ( ) 1992–1995 Lake Steilacoom, WA, USA Anabaena sp., A. flos - aqua , M. aeruginosa MC Dog death Jacoby and Kann ( ) 1993–1996 Tsitsikamma-Kareedouw district, South Cape, Africa Anabaena spp., Oscillatoria spp. MC Affected animals; deaths of 290 dairy livestock and induced-photosensitivity in a further 70 7 cases of stock and animal deaths were recorded in this region Harding ( ) 1994 Kavlingean River, outlet of Lake Vombsjon, Sweden Planktothrix agardhii , Microcystis MC Humans: 121 of 304 people (and dogs, cats, and cattle); vomiting; diarrhoea; nausea; gastroenteritis; fevers; abdominal and muscular pain Annadotter et al. ( , ) 1994 Lake Ringsjön, Sweden Gloeotrichia echinulata UR One family: after swimming, pruritic skin rashes Cronberg ( ) 1994 Lake Zeekoevlei, near Cape Town, South Africa M. aeruginosa , Nodularia spumigena NOD, MC Livestock: hepatotoxicity Van Halderen et al. ( ) 1994–1995 High alpine lakes in Switzerland, Europe Phormidium limosum ( formerly Oscillatoria limosa) , Oscillatoria tenuis MC, ATX-a Cattle: hepatoxicity; neurotoxicity; over 100 cattle deaths Mez et al. ( ) 1994–1995 Jiangsu Province, Nanhui/Shanghai, Fusui China, Asia M . aeruginosa , P . agardhii , Anabaena sp., O. tenuis , Lyngbya MC Humans: primary liver cancer (100 of 10 5 ) Yu ( ), Yu et al. ( ), Ueno et al. ( ) 1998 Erfenis Dam earth-fill type dam, Free State, South Africa Anabaena spp. UR Neurotoxicosis Affected animals; deaths of livestock Van Ginkel and Hohls ( ) 1999–2008 Reservoirs for drinking water supply Central Serbia, Serbia M. aeruginosa , M. flos - aquae , Aphanizomenon flos - aquae , Anabaena flos - aquae , A. spiroides , Planktothrix agardhii N/A Humans: high incidence of primary liver cancer and 12 other cancers (brain; bronchus and lung; heart, mediastinum, and pleura; ovary; testis; kidney; stomach; small intestine; colorectum; retroperitoneum and peritoneum; leukaemia; and malignant melanoma of skin) Svirčev et al. ( ), Drobac et al. ( ), Svirčev et al. ( , ) 1999 Lake Ömerli dam, Istanbul, Turkey M. aeruginosa , Gomphosphaeria sp. MC-LR equiv. Several thousand fish died after M. aeruginosa bloom Albay et al. ( ) 2000 Orange River, South Africa Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii , Anabaena sp., Oscillatoria sp. N/A Fish-kills along the river. First reported incident of C. raciborskii in South Africa Harding and Paxton ( ) 2000–2010 Portugal (eight Alentejo Reservoirs) M. aeruginosa , Aphanizomenon spp., Oscillatoria sp. N/A Humans: high liver enzymes activities (GGT, AST, ALT), liver, colon and rectum cancer incidence Bellem et al. ( ), Bellem ( ) 2001 Lake Bogoria, Kenya, Africa Phormidium terebriformis , O. willei , Spirulina subsalsa , Synechococcus bigranulatus MC-LR MC-RR MC-LF MC-YR ATX-a Mass mortalities of lesser flamingos Krienitz et al. ( ) 2002 Pond Mymensingh, Bangladesh Aph. flos - aquae , M. aeruginosa , M. botrys N/A Mass mortality of fish in the pond. Humans: skin rashes and eye inflammation Jewel et al. ( ) 2003 Pond in Central Queensland, Australia C. raciborskii CYN 10 cattle deaths Shaw et al. ( ) 2004 Lake Big Momela, Tanzania, Africa Arthrospira fusiformis (dominant) UR Mouse bioassay Deaths of lesser flamingos (15 and 50 individuals per day during the study period Lugomela et al. ( ) 2004 Lake Manyara, Tanzania, Africa other cyanobacterial species than Arthrospira Pseudanabaena sp., Phormidium sp., Oscillatoria sp., Aphanocapsa sp. and others UR Mouse bioassay The deaths of lesser flamingos Lugomela et al. ( ) 2005 Lake Oubeira, Algeria Microcystis spp. MC-LR MC-YR MC-RR Mortality of freshwater terrapin, Emys orbicularis and Mauremys leprosa Nasri et al. ( ) 2005–2009 Three Gorges Reservoir Region (two lakes and four wells), China N/A MC Humans: liver damage (elevated liver enzyme activities: AST, ALP) Li et al. ( ) 2005–2010 Lake Kotokel, Russia Aphanocapsa holsatica , Microcystis spp., A. lemmermanni MC-LR MC-RR MC-YR Wildlife mortality and large fish mortality Belykh et al. ( ) 2007 Constructed water impoundment Nhlanganzwane Dam, Kruger National Park, South Africa M. aeruginosa MC Bio-poisoning incidents in wild animals. Mortalities of mega herbivores Oberholster et al. ( ) 2009 Reservoir Piedras Moras, Argentina Anabaena spiroides , M. aeruginosa MC Several animal species mortality, mainly wild birds Mancini et al. ( ) 2009 Lake William, Lake Roxton and Lake Champlain’s Missisquoi Bay, Canada Cyanobacterial cells MC Humans who received contaminated drinking water had an increase in muscle pain, and gastrointestinal, skin and ear symptoms; gastrointestinal symptoms were also associated with recreational contact Lévesque et al. ( ) 2010 Lake Middle Foy, MT, USA N/S MC Dog: lethargic and anorexic, severe depression and vomiting; liver failure Rankin et al. ( ) 2011 Lake Milford, KS, USA M. aeruginosa MC-LR Dogs: hepatotoxicity, gastroenteritis and fulminant liver failure Van der Merwe et al. ( ) 2013 Reservoir Vrutci, Užice, Serbia Planktotrix rubescens MC-LR dmMC-LR dmMC-RR MC-YR Humans: Skin and eye irritations; digestive disorders; fever; chronic headaches; kidney and liver problems Animals: skin lesions; allergies; stomach pain; death of fish, ducks, rooster, hawk, ram, sheep, goat, cow, horse, badger Svirčev et al. ( ) N/S Qidong city, Jiangsu Province, Fusui County in Guangxi, Tongan County in Fujian Province, and Shunde city, Guangdong Province (south east China) N/S MC Humans: primary liver cancer (PLC), deaths. Mortality rate of PLC in these counties was 30 deaths per 100,000 Yu ( ) Recreational water contact 1924 Lake Ontario, Canada Anabaena related N/A Cattle and other animal deaths Howard and Berry ( ) 1934–1935 Lake Muskego, Waukesha County, WI, USA “Weedy lake” UR One man: after swimming, Itching of eyes, nasal congestion, mild asthma Heise ( ) 1936–1946 Lake North, Waukesha County, WI, USA Oscillatoriaceae UR One man: after swimming, Nasal discharge; congestion; conjunctivitis; mild asthma Heise ( ) 1944 Lake Okoboji, IA, USA A. flos - aquae N/A Deaths of pigs Yoo ( ), Backer et al. ( ) 1945 Lake Dauphin, Manitoba, Canada N/S N/A Horse, calves, two pigs and a cat died within an hour McLeod and Bondar ( ) 1945–1946 Lake Keesus, Waukesha County, WI, USA Oscillatoriaceae UR One female: after swimming gross eyelid oedema, nasal congestion, generalized urticarial rash Heise ( ) 1946 Yahara River below Lake Kegonsa, WI,USA Aph. flos - aquae N/A Heavy fish mortality Mackenthun et al. ( ) 1949–1952 Lake Carey, PA, USA Anabaena UR One female after swimming: Seasonal erythematous papulo-vesicular rash, occasionally progressing to oozing and crusting. Rash limited to face, neck, shoulders, upper chest and extremities; rash never seen on areas covered by swimsuit Cohen and Reif ( ) 1952 Lake Storm, IA, USA A. flos – aquae UR Bioassay Deaths of gulls, ducks, coots, pheasants, squirrels, muskrats, dogs, cats, hogs, hawks, skunk, mink. Neurotoxicity signs: prostration and convulsions preceding death; milder cases displayed restlessness; weakness; dyspnoea and tonic spasms Firkins ( ), Rose ( ) 1955 Laguna del Monte, Argentina Anabaena inaequalis , Anabaena circinalis , Polycystis flos - aquae N/A Massive fish mortality Ringuelet et al. ( ) 1959 Lake Katepwa, SK, Canada Microcystis N/A One man, adult: after swimming, headache, nausea, gastrointestinal symptoms Dillenberg and Dehnel ( ) 1959 Lake Long, SK, Canada Microcystis , Anabaena N/A Ten children: after swimming diarrhoea, vomiting. Two cows died after drinking from the lake 12–16 h previously, during a bloom, sickness of one cow Dillenberg and Dehnel ( ) 1959 Lake Echo, SK, Canada Microcystis , A. circinale UR One adult male: after swimming and ingestion of contaminated water abdominal cramps and pain, nausea, vomiting, painful diarrhoea, fever, severe headache, weakness, pain in limb muscles and joints Dillenberg and Dehnel ( ) 1968 USA Anabaena N/A Allergy with skin papulo-vesicular eruptions in a young woman who swam in a lake containing a bloom Schwimmer and Schwimmer ( ) 1969 Lake Gibson, FL, USA M. aeruginosa N/A Death of German Shepard dog Brown ( ), Backer et al. ( ) 1971 Lake in New South Wales, Australia A. circinalis MC “Almost total” mortality of bees from 84 hives associated with the insects watering on the leeward edge of lake May and McBarron ( ) 1973–1974 Belgrano Park Pond, Santa Fe City, Argentina M. aeruginosa ; bloom contained up to 60,000 colonies/mL UR Humans: after swimming and bathing gastrointestinal symptoms, dermatitis, otitis, conjunctivitis Pizzolon et al. ( ) 1976 Lake Roosevelt, WA, USA A. flos - aquae N/A Deaths of four dogs, seven sick Soltero and Nichols ( ) 1977 Reservoir Hebgen, MO, USA A. flos - aquae ATX 14 cattle deaths Juday et al. ( ) 1979 Lake Wallenpaupack, PA, USA Heavy bloom of Anabaena N/A Humans (whole family): hayfever-like symptoms (sneezing, nasal discharge, eye irritation); earache Billings ( ) 1979 Lake Arrowhead, PA, USA N/S N/A One female: after swimming chills, sore throat, fever, nausea, diarrhoea Billings ( ) 1979 Lake Arrowhead, PA, USA N/S N/A 20–30 children, several adults: after swimming headache, stomach cramps, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, fever, rash, sore or inflamed throat Billings ( ) 1979 Lake at Northern Monroe County, PA, USA Anabaena N/A One man: hay fever-like symptoms Outbreak involving 12 children and one adult at a lake shore community; symptoms ranged from gastrointestinal involvement to hayfever-like Billings ( ) 1980 Lake Pocono Highlands, PA, USA Anabaena sp. UR Hepatotoxin Humans: after swimming eye irritation, earache, sore throat Carmichael et al. ( ) 1980 Lake Lahonton, NV, USA Aph. flos - aquae UR LD 50 = 500 mg kg −1 body weight (i.p. mouse) Humans: several affected after swimming and water skiing: erythema, eye irritation, dizziness, nausea, stomach cramps, diarrhoea Carmichael et al. ( ) 1980 Camp William Penn, PA, USA Anabaena sp. UR Humans: 75–100 campers affected from contact with water: conjunctivitis, sore-red throat, headaches, diarrhoea, nausea Carmichael et al. ( ) 1981 Lake Harveys, PA, USA A. flos - aquae UR Neurotoxins, hepatotoxins Humans: skin irritation, nausea, dizziness, diarrhoea Carmichael et al. ( ) 1981 Lake Black, ID, USA Nostoc commune ATX Five cattle and two dogs died after drinking water from lake shore Kann and Falter ( ) 1982 Lake Moses, WA, USA Anabaena flos - aquae N/A 2 dogs died Edmondson ( ), Jacoby and Kann ( ) 1985 Lake Richmond, SD, USA Anabaena flos - aquae ATX-a(S) 9 dogs died Mahmood et al. ( ) 1985 USA N/S N/A Humans: Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, fever and ear, nose and throat infections Carmichael ( ) 1985 Lake Alberta, Canada N/S ATX-a 500 dead bats and estimated over 1000 deaths on the leeward side of a lake, and at least 24 dead mallards Pybus et al. ( ) 1985 Lakes in Wisconsin (25 of 86 analysed), USA N/S UR hepatotoxin (mouse bioassay) Several incidents over the years when wildlife and domestic deaths were attributed to cyanotoxin(s) Sonzogni et al. ( ) 1986 Lakes in Wisconsin, USA N/S N/A 3 dogs died Dadisman ( ) 1986 Lake Forsyth, New Zealand Nodularia spumigena UR Numerous stock deaths Connor ( ) 1987 Lake Ostra Krksundet, Finland O. agardhii UR Fish and bird kills associated with cyanobacterial blooms Lindholm et al. ( ) 1989 Reservoir Rudyard, England, Stafordshire, UK M. aeruginosa MC-LR Humans: after canoeing with 360 ° rolls, 10 of 20 soldiers ill: gastroenteritis; sore throat; blistered mouth; vomiting; abdominal pain; fever; pulmonary consolidation; diarrhoea; abdominal tenderness and elevated temperature; oral, inhalation route and skin contact. 2 patients in intensive care Turner et al. ( ) 1989 Rutland Water, England Microcystis sp. 5 MCs Deaths of 15 dogs and 20 sheep after drinking; vomiting; diarrhoea; liver damage, kidney problems. 5 MCs identified in sheep rumen. Major water storage reservoir supplying drinking water to a population of 450,000 developed a bloom of Microcystis National Rivers Authority ( ), Codd and Beattie ( ), Lawton et al. ( ), Rose ( ) 1989 Japan (lake) M. aeruginosa MC Humans: one person: rashes after swimming National Rivers Authority ( ) 1989 Bewl Water, Kent, UK Microcystis sp. N/A Humans: after fishing: blotchy’ skin on face and hands after handling water on three separate occasions National Rivers Authority ( ) 1990 Unnamed lake, Tiel, The Netherlands A. flos - aquae ATX-a Humans: after swimming: gastrointestinal symptoms Van Hoof ( ) 1990 Lake Cargelligo, NSW, Australia A. circinalis N/A Humans: after swimming and canoeing: hay fever-like reactions, rash, eye irritation and pneumonia Livestock deaths Christopher et al. ( ) 1990 Murray River, Australia A. circinalis STX and related neurotoxins Deaths of 1600 cattle and sheep Humpage et al. ( ) 1990 s Reservoir Canyon, UT, USA Cyanobacteria UR Deaths of two dogs Winterton ( ) 1991 Lake, OR, USA Anabaena UR Deaths of three dogs McAllister ( ) 1991 Darling-Barwon River system, NSW, Australia Anabaena spp. N/A Humans: after sampling water: skin irritation After water skiing: skin rash, conjunctivitis, diarrhoea, respiratory difficulty By summer, the blooms and scum had grown to cover an 1200 km of the Darling River NSW Blue-Green Algae Task Force ( ) 1991–1992 Murray River, SA, Australia A. circinalis UR Humans:11 affected after skiing: rash, itching, mouth blistering, eye irritation After oral ingestion: diarrhoea, vomiting, nausea, muscle weakness, sore throat, respiratory difficulty, headache El Saadi and Cameron ( ) 1992 Darling River, Wilcannia, NSW, Australia Anabaena sp. UR Humans: two teenagers, after swimming gastroenteritis and myalgia Williamson and Corbett ( ) 1992 Loch Leven, Scotland M . aeruginosa , A. flos - aquae MC Fish (trout): gill injury; fish deaths Rodger et al. ( ) 1992 Loch Insh, Scotland Planktotrix spp. ATX-a Dog deaths after ingestion of cyanobacterial mats: neurotoxicity Gunn et al. ( ) 1992 Lochs Awe and Avich, UK Oscillatoria spp. ATX-a 2 dog deaths, 2 recoveries after ingestion of dried shoreline cyanobacterial crusts; symptoms of neurotoxin poisoning Codd et al. ( ) 1992–1993 Lake American, USA A. flos - aquae ATX 11 animal poisonings, 5 cat fatalities Jacoby and Kann ( ) 1992–1993 Lake Mokoan, Australia M. aeruginosa MC-LR Hepatocyte necrosis of fish (carp) liver Carbis and Rawlin ( ) 1993 Michigan Pond, MI, USA (during cold weather) Microcystis sp. MC Poisoning in four yearling heifer cattle (one survived) Fitzgerald and Poppenga ( ) 1993 Lake in Denmark Anabaena lemmermannii ATX-a(S) MC Waterbird deaths Henriksen et al. ( ), Onodera et al. ( ) 1994 Lake Zeekoevlei near Cape Town, South Africa 95% Nodularia spumigena , 5% M. aeruginosa NOD Dog poisoning: Lethargy; vomiting, loss of appetite. Death after 5 days Harding et al. ( ) 1994 Dam in Australia A. circinalis STX 14 sheep immediately died next to a farm dam. Observed signs were trembling, recumbency and crawling; neurotoxicity Negri et al. ( ) 1994 Lake Velence, Hungary Heavy bloom of M. aeruginosa MC Humans: 100–150 children: skin and eye irritation Habermehl et al. ( ), https://books.google.rs/books/about/Current_Approaches_to_Cyanotoxin_Risk_As.html?id = jk9TlwEACAAJ&redir_esc = y 1994 Ciénaga Grande de Santa Marta, Colombia Anabaenopsis sp. N/A Massive fish mortality (over 20 tons). The massive death phenomenon here reported appears to be the largest in recent years Mancera and Vidal ( ) 1994 Lake Iznik, Turkey Anabaena spp. N/A After the formation of blooms of Anabaena spp., dead fish were found on the lake shore Albay ( ) 1995 New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia Microcystis , Nodularia , Anabaena , Aphanizomenon UR Humans: 852 participants showed elevated incidence of gastrointestinal and respiratory problems; flu-like symptoms; blistered mouth; fever, eye and ear irritation; vomiting; diarrhoea Pilotto et al. ( ) 1995 Shinike Pond in Hyogo Prefecture, Japan M. aeruginosa MC-RR, MC-LR Duck deaths. The entry of untreated sewage following an earthquake Matsunaga et al. ( ) 1995 Ponds near Liège, Belgium M. aeruginosa MC-LR MC-RR Bird mortality Wirsing et al. ( ) 1996 Lake Hollingworth, England Planktothrix agardhii MC Humans: 11 sea cadets with facial rashes; asthmatic signs and dry sporadic cough with vomiting Codd et al. ( ) 1996 Lake Tarawera, New Zealand A. circinalis UR Humans: people waterskiing displayed symptoms of cyanotoxin exposure (intense rash on face, arms and torso); fish-kill Wilding ( ) 1997 Lake Pakowki, Alberta, Canada M. aeruginosa MC-LR Bird mortality Park et al. ( ) 1997 Carmel River, CA, USA Cyanobacteria N/A Death of one dog Marks ( ) 1997 Lake Sammamish, WA, USA M. aeruginosa MC Humans: Young children after swimming: gastrointestinal, rashes Calvan ( ), Johnston and Jacoby ( ) 1997 Lake Sapanca, Turkey Planktothrix rubescens MC Fish died after the development of a bloom of P. rubescens After this incident, it was decided to investigate the occurrence of cyanobacterial toxins Albay et al. ( ) 1998 Georgia Pond, USA Microcystis sp. MC Deaths of 4 cattle Frazier et al. ( ) 1998 Waikanae River, New Zealand Oscillatoria sp. ATX-a Deaths of five dogs Hamill ( ) 1999 Lake Champlain, New York, USA N/S ATX-a Several dogs died Boyer et al. ( ) 1999 Lake Planetario, Buenos Aires, Argentina M. aeruginosa MC Urban recreational lake, fish and duck mortality Ehrenhaus and Vigna ( ) 1999–2000 Mataura River, New Zealand Oscillatoria sp. ATX-a MC Death of six dogs Hamill ( ) 1999–2005 Lake Salton Sea, CA, USA Synechococcus sp., Oscillatoria sp., Gloeocapsa sp., Phormidium sp., Aphanothece sp., Lyngbya sp. MC Over 200,000 grebe mortalities Carmichael and Li ( ) 1999–2002 South Queensland and Myall Lakes area of New South Wales (Australia), and northeast and central FL (USA) N/S MCs CYN ATX-a Human: ear, eye, gastrointestinal, respiratory, cutaneous symptoms—epidemiological study Stewart et al. ( ) 2000 Mymensingh district (Lake Ishakha, Brahmmaputra River, BAU Pond, pond at Mymensingh city, BFRI Pond, Sutiakhali Pond, Bailor Pond, Kalirbazar, Chattrapur Pond), Bangladesh A. crassa , A. spiroides , Aph. flos - aquae , Cyanodictyon imperfectum , M. aeruginosa , Aphanocapsa sp., M. botrys , M. flos - aquae , M. natans , M. wesenbergii , Snowella litoralis MCs Fish mortality and bad odours; humans: eye and skin irritation; allergic reactions Affan et al. ( ) 2000 Drainage ditch Grimstad, Norway N/S MC Acute cyanobacterial hepatotoxicosis in a wild roe deer ( Capreolus capreolus ) Handeland and Østensvik ( ) 2000–2004 Lake Champlain, USA N/S ATX Deaths of 2 dogs Boyer ( ) 2001 Donaña Wetland National Park, Spain N/S MC Mortality of several hundred greater flamingo chicks Alonso-Andicoberry et al. ( ) 2001 Central and Northwest Queensland, Australia C. raciborskii CYN In two separate poisoning incidents 55 cows were lethargic and recumbent for 3 or 4 days antemortem, with hepatocyte degeneration and necrosis, nephrosis and multifocal cardiomyopathy. Cattle deaths Shaw et al. ( ) 2002 Eel River, Humboldt County, CA, USA Anabaena sp., Lyngbya sp., Planktothrix sp. ATX-a Deaths of 3 dogs Puschner et al. ( ) 2002 Golf course Pond, Milwaukee, WI, USA A. flos - aquae ATX-a Humans: 17-year-old developed nausea, vomiting, progressed to “shock” and “seizure”, acute heart failure; death occurred 48 h after exposure A companion boy who also swallowed some of the pond water while swimming later became sick with severe diarrhoea and abdominal pain but survived. 3 other boys who had not been fully submerged in the water, developed only unspecified minor symptoms Behm ( ), Carmichael et al. ( ), Furey et al. ( ) 2002–2005 Tarn River, South France Oscillatoriales , Pseudanabaena , Geitlerinema , Oscillatoria ATX-a HomoATX-a Dog deaths Cadel-Six et al. ( ) 2002–2006 Sassafras River, tidal estuary of Chesapeake Bay, USA Synechococcus sp. MC Reported waterfowl deaths Tango and Butler ( ) 2002–2003 Four Lakes (Lake Salajärvi, Lake Iso-Kukkanen, Lake Lapinjarvi, Lake Iso-Torava), Finland A. lemmermannii , Aphanizomenon sp., Aph. flos - aquae , M. aeruginosa , M. flos - aquae , M. wesenbergii STX MC Humans: symptoms of fever, eye irritation, abdominal pains, and skin rash were reported in children aged 2–10 years after exposure to the water Rapala et al. ( ) 2003 Lake Sompanen, Finland N/S STX Humans: Seven young people: “extensive” generalized rash Rapala et al. ( ) 2003 La Loue River (Jura region), France Lyngbya sp., Oscillatoria sp., Oscillatoria cf. limosa , Phormidium sp., Phormidium favosum , Pseudanabaena sp. ATX-a Death of 2 dogs Gugger et al. ( ) 2003 Reservoir Marechal Dutra, Brazil C. raciborskii , M. aeruginosa MC Mass fish mortality Chellappa et al. ( ) 2003–2004 Lake Rotoiti, New Zealand A. circinalis , A. lemmermannii , A. planktonica , M. aeruginosa , M. botrys MC MC in rainbow trout muscle tissues and in freshwater mussels Wood et al. ( ) 2003–2004 Lake Rotoehu, New Zealand Microcystis spp., M. panniformis , Anabaena spp. MC MC in rainbow trout liver and muscle tissues Wood et al. ( ) 2004 Donaña Wetland National Park, Spain M. aeruginosa MC-LR equiv. Thousands of fish, at least 6000 birds (47 species), including endangered species such as the Marmaronetta angustirostris and Oxyura leucocephala , died within 2 weeks Lopez-Rodas et al. ( ) 2004 Lake Kegonsa State Park, WI, USA Anabaena , Microcystis , Aphanizomenon UR Death of Labrador dog Novak and Sensenbrenner ( ), Williams ( ) 2004 Lake Buccaneer Bay’s, NE, USA Anabaena sp. MC Death of 2 dogs Walker et al. ( ) 2004 Lake Neatahwanta, NY, USA Anabaena sp. ATX-a Dog death Goldberg ( ) 2004 Reservoir San Roque, Cordoba, Argentina Cyanobacterial blooms MC-RR (in liver, gills, and muscle of all exposed and wild fish) The amount of MC-RR in muscle of Odontesthes bonariensis exceeded the value suggested by WHO to be safe Cazenave et al. ( ) 2004 Lake Pawnee, NE, USA N/S MC 50 calls about skin rashes, lesions, blisters, vomiting, headaches, and diarrhoea after swimming or skiing; death of 5 dogs Walker et al. ( ) 2005 Pond near Harlingen TX, USA M. aeruginosa MC-LR Mortality of white shrimp in aquaculture ponds Zimba et al. ( ) 2005 Hutt River, New Zealand Phormidium autumnale ATX-a HomoATX-a At least five dogs died rapidly after contact with water Wood et al. ( ) 2006 Lake Anderson, WA, USA Anabaena , Microcystis , Aphanizomenon ATX-a Death of 2 dogs Jacoby and Kann ( ) 2006 Lakes Chamo, Langano, Ziway, Tana and Koka, Ethiopia M. aeruginosa , Microcystis panniformis , A. spiroides , Cylindrospermopsis spp. MC Deaths and illnesses of wild and domestic animals Willén et al. ( ) 2007 Water impoundments in the Kruger National Park (South Africa) 4 dams (Nhlanganzwani, Mpanamana, Makhohlola, and Sunset) M. aeruginosa MC Wildlife mortalities around Nhlanganzwani Dam (15 white rhinos, eight zebras, and five blue wildebeest) and Sunset Dam (one white rhino and six impala) Masango et al. ( ) 2007 Reservoir Salto Grande Dam, Argentina Microcystis spp. MC Humans: acute poisonings of a man; nausea; abdominal pain and fever; dyspnea and respiratory distress; atypical pneumonia and liver failure Giannuzzi et al. ( ) 2008 Waitaki River, New Zealand Phormidium sp. MC-LR Dog died soon after ingesting benthic “algal” mat material. First known instance of a benthic MC-producing species causing an animal death in New Zealand Wood et al. ( ) 2009 Lake in Ortiz de Ocampo, La Rioja, Argentina M. aeruginosa UR neurotoxins, hepatotoxins Deaths of 72 cows in 24 h Claro et al. ( ) 2008–2009 Lake Vico, Italy Planktothrix rubescens MC MC contamination in five fish species Bruno et al. ( ) 2011 Lake IJmeer, Netherlands Phormidium sp. HomoATX-a ATX-a Dogs: neurotoxicity, death of three dogs Faassen et al. ( ) 2011 Lake Amstelmeer, Netherlands M. aeruginosa MC-LR Dogs: 3 dogs died Lürling and Faassen ( ) 2011–2013 Lake Milford, KS, USA M. aeruginosa MC Dog deaths: vomiting; inappetence; weakness; lethargy. Death of dogs Humans: human illnesses (eye and upper respiratory tract irritation, rash and gastrointestinal problems) Van der Merwe et al. ( ), Sebbag et al. ( ), Trevino-Garrison et al. ( ) 2012–2013 Lake Aleksandrovac, Serbia C. raciborskii CYN Fish-kill Đorđević et al. ( ) 2014 Lake Vistonis, Greece Aph. favaloroi STX NSTX Massive fish kill Moustaka-Gouni et al. ( ) 2015 Carrasco Beach, Montevideo, Uruguay Intense bloom; Microcystis (predominant) MC MC-LR [D-Leu1]MC-LR Human family, after swimming: self-limited gastrointestinal symptoms, except for child who was admitted to hospital with extensive liver damage, diarrhoea, vomiting, fatigue, and jaundice. First known case of liver transplant after MC exposure. Vidal et al. ( ) 2016 Reservoir Karla, Greece Anabaenopsis elenkinii , Planktothrix spp., C. raciborskii , Aph. favalaroi MC STX CYN 91 immature Dalmatian pelicans found dead Papadimitriou et al. ( ) 2017 Lake Tegel, Berlin, Germany Fontinalis antipyretica with high amounts of Tychonema sp. ATX 12 dogs showed signs of acute neurotoxicosis after swimming in or drinking from lake, several of the affected dogs died This is the first report of a dense population of Tychonema sp. in stands of Fontinalis resulting in high ATX contents Fastner et al. ( ) N/S Australia M . aeruginosa MC Sheep: hepatotoxicity; neurotoxicity Jackson et al. ( ) N/S Finland N . spumigena NOD Dogs: hepatotoxicity Persson et al. ( ) N/S Finland P . agardhii MC Waterfowl, fish, muskrats: hepatotoxicity Eriksson et al. ( ) N/S Norway M . aeruginosa MC Cattle: hepatotoxicity Skulberg ( ) N/S Australia A. circinalis STX Humans: Severe respiratory distress in water-skiers, inhaling water spray Falconer ( ) N/S Darling River, Australia A. circinalis N/A 10,000 livestock died Falconer ( ) N/S N/S (reservoir), UK N/S MC One man: hepatic dysfunction in a 39-year-old who was windsurfing in a MC-contaminated reservoir Probert et al. ( ) Haemodialysis 1996 Reservoir Tabocas (Caruaru’s water source), northwest Brazil Aphanizomenon sp., Oscillatoria sp., Microcystis , Anabaena , Anabaenopsis , Cylindrospermopsis MC-LR MC-YR MC-AR CYN Humans: 52 deaths out of 131 hemodialysis patients after receiving dialysis treatment using chlorinated water. Tinnitus; blindness; nausea; gastrointestinal disease; vomiting; liver damage; deaths Jochimsen et al. ( ), Pouria et al. ( ), Carmichael et al. ( ), Azevedo et al. ( ) 2001 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Anabaena, Microcystis MC Humans: visual disturbance; tinnitus; nausea; vomiting; liver damage Bláha et al. ( ) Terrestrial environments 2013–2014 Doha, Qatar Terrestrial cyanobacterial species MC ATX-a(S) Four dogs showed signs of severe neurotoxicity after recreation in desert environments and consumption of rainwater accumulated in natural depressions Metcalf et al. ( ), Chatziefthimiou et al. ( ) ATX - a anatoxin-a, ATX - a(S) anatoxin-a(S), CYN cylindrospermopsin, MC microcystins, NOD nodularin, N/A not analysed cyanobacterial toxic metabolites, N/S not stated, NSTX neosaxitoxin, STX saxitoxins, UR unknown reasons (group of cyanotoxins was not specified)
Individual poisonings in humans have been caused largely associated with recreational activities in rivers and lakes affected with cyanobacterial blooms (Table 5 ). Furthermore, cyanotoxins can also be aerosolized and continue to exist after a bloom has dissipated, causing chronic impact on humans (e.g. Backer et al. ). While the reported animal deaths have usually occurred shortly after the ingestion of cyanobacterial scums, progressive injury with delayed mortality has also been seen in animal poisoning by Microcystis aeruginosa (Table 5 ). The other main cause of livestock and pet deaths due to cyanotoxins has been from acute neurotoxicity leading to respiratory failure.
There have been some notable reviews on cyanobacterial occurrences and their toxin production; however, many of them are 10 or more years old (Codd et al. ; Chorus et al. ; Funari and Testai ; Bláha et al. ). Highlights of the review from Codd et al. ( ) were cyanotoxin exposure media and routes, and Chorus et al. ( ) emphasized the importance of monitoring, precautionary measures, legislative actions and health effects. Chorus et al. ( ) and Bláha et al. ( ) dealt with documented cases of human illnesses attributed to cyanotoxins, citing 383 and 126 documents, respectively, but reporting only 14, and 19 poisoning cases, respectively. More recent papers such as Rastogi et al. ( ) have warned about cyanobacterial blooming events. Buratti et al. ( ) and Funari and Testai ( ) presented several cases of intoxication focusing on human health. Svirčev et al. ( ) described 33 cases of human poisonings associated with cyanobacteria and their toxins in 11 countries, with a special emphasis on epidemiological research. Merel et al. ( ) reviewed the current state of knowledge on cyanobacterial blooms and cyanotoxins, as well as their economic impact, research needs, mechanisms of cyanotoxin production and removal methods. Another paper from Merel et al. ( ) on the spatial and thematic distribution of research on cyanotoxins showed that 90% of the research on cyanotoxins had originated from only ten countries. The present review paper focuses on the occurrence of cyanotoxins worldwide and presents a more detailed overview of the animal and human poisoning incidents (Table 5 ).
The oldest known report of possible human poisoning by cyanotoxins was documented by General Zhu Ge-Liang, about 1000 years ago, concerning the deaths of soldiers who drank green water from a river in southern China (Chorus and Bartram ). The first known case of a widespread human poisoning (5000–8000 persons) may have been in 1931, Charleston, West Virginia, where precipitation, filtration and chlorination treatment were ineffective against cyanobacterial blooms (Miller and Tisdale ). Also, cyanotoxin episodes from Australia in 1979 are known, where 149 people were hospitalized (Metcalf and Codd ). In Brazil in 1988, 2000 persons, of whom which 88 died, manifested gastrointestinal symptoms after drinking water from a newly built dam reservoir contaminated with cyanotoxins (Teixeira et al. ; Metcalf and Codd ). An early case of MC poisoning occurred in northwest England in 1989, when a group of 20 army recruits was carrying out canoeing and swimming exercises in Rudyard Lake, where a Microcystis scum occurred. After being in contact with, and ingesting cyanotoxin-containing scum and water, 10 of 20 soldiers became ill, showing symptoms of gastroenteritis, sore throat, blistering in and around the mouth, vomiting, abdominal pain, fever, pulmonary consolidation and diarrhoea (Turner et al. ). Investigations have shown similar blooms in a number of other lakes, reservoirs, ponds and rivers throughout the world (Table 5 ), and as a result, most of those affected were temporarily closed for recreational use. In Australia, during the summer of 1989/1990, major blooms of Anabaena , Microcystis and Nodularia occurred in water storage reservoirs, rivers and natural lake systems. It was likely that the inhalation route was to some extent involved in the Rudyard and Hollingworth Lake incidents (Turner et al. ; Codd et al. ). While the toxicity of MCs via inhalation has not received as much attention as via oral exposure, available evidence indicates that nasal exposure in rodents has a toxicity close to that of intraperitoneal injection, and some 10–50 times greater than via oral administration (Fitzgeorge et al. ). In Wisconsin, USA, a case was reported where a teenage boy, who was diving in a golf course pond with heavy scums of toxic Anabaena flos - aquae , died; exposure to ATX-a was a likely cause (Carmichael et al. ). Additionally, in Australia, several cases have been reported of severe respiratory distress in water-skiers, who were inhaling water spray containing A. circinalis , a STX producer (Falconer ). A tragic case of cyanotoxin poisoning, including 52 human fatalities occurred in the town of Caruaru, Brazil in 1996, after intravenous exposure to large amounts of MCs through ineffectively treated water during haemodialysis (Jochimsen et al. ; Pouria et al. ; Carmichael et al. ; Azevedo et al. ). The lake supplying the haemodialysis clinic with raw water for treatment had a history of cyanobacterial bloom development and a bloom occurred at the time of the intoxications. MCs and CYN were present in the clinic water treatment system, while MCs were also detected in patient serum and liver tissue. Furthermore, histological inspection of liver tissue uncovered similar histopathological changes as previously seen in animals exposed to MCs. After this outbreak of this “Caruaru Syndrome”, cyanobacteria and their toxins were incorporated into new Brazilian regulations for drinking water quality. A recent European case involved 70,000 water-users in Serbia who were potentially exposed to MCs through their drinking water. In December 2013 an intensive bloom of Planktothrix rubescens was observed in the Vrutci Reservoir which served as the drinking water source for the city of Užice, Serbia. Planktothrix filaments were soon noticed in the finished drinking water and the use of the tap water was restricted. While the MC-LR concentration in the finished water was below the WHO provisional guideline value (1 µg L −1 ) several MCs were detected by LC–MS/MS (liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometric detection methods) in the reservoir biomass and demethylated MC-RR was also found in the tap water. A questionnaire and epidemiological studies indicated an elevated occurrence of digestive tract and skin diseases in the exposed population and a connection of symptoms to the exposure to cyanobacterial bloom material was deemed plausible (Svirčev et al. ).
The earliest known experimental investigation following (and confirming) a cyanobacterial poisoning episode involved that of animals and was performed by Francis ( ) at Lake Alexandrina, South Australia. In this study, Francis was able to reproduce the signs of pathology and the time course leading to the deaths of sheep after drinking scum containing Nodularia spumigena by orally dosing healthy sheep using the scum. The inference that the Nodularia scum contained a hepatotoxic factor was consistent with the discovery of NOD in such material over a hundred years later (Francis ; Codd et al. ). Numerous cases of animal poisonings associated with cyanobacterial blooms, and including likely causality by cyanotoxins, have since been reported throughout the world. Most of these have been associated with Microcystis spp., Anabaena spp., Aphanizomenon flos - aquae , Planktothrix spp. and Cylindrospermopsis spp. (e.g. Thomas et al. ; Saker et al. ; Shaw et al. ; Table 5 ). Some reports have referred to large numbers of affected animals, rapid disease progression (within minutes), and deaths (e.g. McLeod and Bondar ; Rose ; Codd et al. ; Table 5 ). Some of the biggest and most frequent episodes of animal intoxication with cyanotoxins appear to have occurred in Australia, where about 10,000 livestock died following a large bloom of A. circinalis in the Darling River (Falconer ). Some animals appear to be attracted to cyanobacteria in water, and to dried crusts and mats on shorelines (Codd et al. ; Stewart et al. ), including an apparent preference for M. aeruginosa scum over clean drinking water (Lopez-Rodas and Costas ). Livestock poisonings have even occurred under environmental conditions considered unfavorable for cyanobacterial blooms, such as cold temperatures and low nutrient concentrations, e.g. in a Michigan, USA, pond during cold weather (Fitzgerald and Poppenga ); and in a Georgia pond during mid-November (Frazier et al. ). However, most of the animal intoxications associated with cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins appear to have occurred during/after conditions favourable for cyanobacterial mass accumulation (Huisman et al. ), including higher temperature, elevated nutrient concentrations and low water flows. An early indication of these conditions and associated animal mortalities was provided by Kirkby ( ) who reported cattle, dog and poultry deaths between June and August at the Tuchomskie Lake in northern Poland, after drinking when buoyant green biomass was concentrated along the shoreline by an onshore wind. Nutrient concentrations may also have been high in the lake since this was a fishery serving a nearby monastery (Kirkby ; Codd et al. ). The incomplete historical record of cyanobacterial mass population and cyanotoxin occurrences in waterbodies is likely to be supplemented by the promising application of specific chemical and molecular genetic methods to dated profiles of sediments (e.g. Ceglowska et al. ).
The cyanotoxin poisoning cases have been assembled and assessed to gain more insight into their distribution, reasons for their occurrences, and from which areas of the world they have originated. The database is summarized and discussed in the next section.
Summary and interpretation of reported findings on cyanotoxin poisonings throughout the world
Based on the publications included in the database, there were 183 recorded cyanotoxin poisonings of humans and animals reported worldwide. Their distribution is shown in Fig. 10 . Fig. 10 Geographical distribution of human and animal poisonings associated with cyanobacteria or cyanotoxins
From the gathered data from each continent, it is evident that most poisoning cases were reported in North and Central America, followed by Europe and Australia/New Zealand (Figs. 10 and 11 ). Fig. 11 Distribution of reported poisoning cases worldwide including identification of cyanotoxins
There were 20 poisoning cases (out of 179 ecosystems with intoxications worldwide) described in Africa which accounted for 11% of the total number of poisonings reported globally (Fig. 11 ). Among them, humans were only known to have been exposed to cyanotoxins in one case, while the remainders were animal poisonings, with 19 cases resulting in deaths. The number of poisonings was much lower than the number of waterbodies found to contain cyanotoxins. The highest number of waterbodies found to contain cyanotoxins (24 and 17) was found in South Africa and Nigeria, where 58% of the poisonings were documented in South Africa, and none in Nigeria. Furthermore, three waterbodies from Algeria and Zimbabwe recorded one poisoning case in each waterbody (Fig. 3 ). In some ecosystems, several cyanotoxins were found, but the number of detected poisonings was small (APPENDIX S5). Most of the reported poisonings were associated with exposure to MCs (60%; 15 out of 25 cases of the cyanotoxins involved in poisonings in Africa). NODs and ATXs were also assumed to be responsible for cyanobacterial poisoning in Africa (8% and 4%, respectively). In 12% of the poisoning cases, there was a lack of information about the chemical nature of the cyanobacterial compounds and they were designated as UR (unknown reason). Furthermore, in 16% of the poisoning cases in Africa, analyses for cyanotoxins were not performed and they were designated as N/A (not analysed).
Compared to the number of waterbodies with cyanotoxin(s) detected in Asia (131), the number of poisonings described was very low (16) (APPENDIX S2). Poisoning cases were documented in China, Turkey, Japan, Bangladesh, Qatar and Russia. MCs appeared to be the most common cause of cyanobacterial poisoning in Asia (87%; 20 out of the 23 cyanotoxin cases involved in poisonings in Asia), whilst the presence of ATXs was detected in 4% of the waterbodies examined. The remaining cases (9%) described in the reports and literature from Asia did not include necessary analyses for cyanotoxins (N/A). However, NODs, STXs and CYNs were detected in Asian waterbodies, suggesting that they may have already caused health problems in humans and animals in Asia and may do so in the future.
In Australia including New Zealand, 15% (27 out of 179 ecosystems with intoxications worldwide) of the total number of worldwide poisonings was reported (Fig. 11 ). As a likely cause of poisonings in Australia including New Zealand, members of all five of the most commonly recognized cyanotoxin types were detected, including MCs (29%; 8 out of 28 cases of cyanotoxins involved in poisonings in Australia including New Zealand), STXs (18%), CYN (11%), ATXs (11%) and NOD (4%). The data from Australia with New Zealand also show that 18% of the cyanotoxin episodes were apparently caused by uncharacterized cyanotoxins (UR), suggesting a lack of data regarding cyanotoxin detection in some acute cases. In comparison with size of the country, a high number of waterbodies with identified cyanotoxins have been reported from New Zealand: 87 (APPENDIX S6) with 8 associated poisoning incidents (Fig. 10 ). The finding of this high number probably reflects the relatively intensive cyanotoxin research in progress in New Zealand.
In comparison with the rest of the world, much of the research on cyanobacterial blooms and cyanotoxins has been done in Europe , which has undoubtedly contributed to a relatively detailed understanding of cyanotoxin distribution throughout this continent. Most of the reported poisoning cases were detected in freshwater ecosystems in the UK, but also in Finland, the Netherlands, France, Greece, Norway, Serbia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Belgium, Denmark, Hungary and Italy. In Europe, all of the most commonly found types of cyanotoxins have been found to be associated with negative health effects in humans and animals. MCs were inferred to be responsible for poisoning in 32% (10 out of 31 cyanotoxins cases involved in poisonings in Europe) of the reported cases, the same as ATXs with 32%, while NOD and CYN were responsible for only 1 and 2 poisoning cases (3% and 6%), respectively. Only in 10% of the cases were the chemical structures of compounds, inferred to be responsible for the poisonings, not specified (UR), and in 3% of the cases appropriate toxicity tests were not applied (N/A).
In comparison to the number of waterbodies with detected cyanotoxin(s) in North America and Central America (204), the number of poisonings described as related to cyanotoxins was the highest (39%; 69 cases out of 179) (Fig. 11 ; APPENDIX S4). Most of the poisoning cases were detected in the USA, with relatively few in Canada. Out of all poisonings, MCs were inferred to have caused 27% (18 out of 67), followed by 19% of the intoxications being attributed to ATXs. CYN was present in a very small proportion of the cases (1%) involving animal and human poisonings. NODs and STXs were not found in any of the cyanobacterial poisoning cases reported from North America. On the other hand, the presence of STXs (of cyanobacterial origin) and CYN was detected in numerous freshwater ecosystems; therefore, these cyanotoxins could become a possible threat to animal and human health in the future. In about 30% of the North and Central American human and animal health incidents, no analyses for particular cyanotoxins are available (N/A), a consequence, perhaps of the early reporting of such incidents before the availability modern analytical cyanotoxin methods. Thus, a high proportion of the number of poisoning cases (22%) is classified as due to unknown reasons (UR).
Besides Asia, a low percentage of poisoning cases reported to be associated with cyanobacterial mass populations is apparent in South America (8%, 14 cases out of 179) (Fig. 11 ). The highest number of waterbodies with reported cyanotoxin episodes has been in Argentina (8 cases), with further cases in Brazil, Uruguay and Colombia (Fig. 10 ). MCs were inferred to be responsible for about half of the cyanobacterial poisonings in South America (53%; 8 out of 15), and CYN was present in a smaller percentage of the events (7%). About 20% of the reported intoxications cannot be attributed to particular toxins (UR) and no toxicity tests were performed (N/A) in a similar percentage of cases. Although both ATXs and cyanobacterial STXs were detected in freshwater environments in South America, so far, there appear to be no reports of poisoning caused by these cyanotoxins. However, in the future, STXs from cyanobacteria could raise concern regarding potential cyanotoxin poisoning, being the second most commonly found group of cyanotoxins in South America.
After examination of the data on poisonings associated with exposure to cyanobacterial mass populations (blooms, scums and mats), wildlife and domestic animals were found to have been the most common victims (63%; 114 out of 182) (Fig. 12 ). In 32% (58 out of 182) of poisoning cases, the exact cause was not determined (UR and N/A), but cyanobacterial blooms, scums and mats were reported. About half of these cases were reported from North America. Although a range of human illnesses, from mild to severe, have been reported, actual human deaths associated with exposure to cyanobacteria or cyanotoxins have been reported only from South America, North America and Asia, with six known incidents in total, while animal deaths (usually domestic animals, pets, and fish) were reported in about 100 separate cases throughout the world. More than one-third of the cases involving animal deaths were reported in North America. Fig. 12 Percentage ratio of reported cases of human and animal poisonings caused by or associated with cyanotoxins
In addition to the attraction to cyanobacterial mats and dried crusts, perhaps due to cyanobacterial taste and odour compounds, dogs appear to be particularly vulnerable to cyanotoxin poisoning: after swimming in cyanobacterial blooms and scum, the animals may concentrate and ingest the material by licking and cleaning their legs and coats (Codd et al. ). Furthermore, domestic dogs are very common victims of toxic cyanobacterial blooms because they will swim in, or drink contaminated water that people would otherwise avoid. Reports of early detection of cyanotoxicosis in dogs can provide an important alert to local and national environmental and public health authorities regarding potential human exposure to cyanotoxins (Backer et al. ). Humans appear to have been less often affected than animals (32%; 58 out of 182): usually after swimming or after accidentally ingesting contaminated water that resulted in respiratory/gastrointestinal problems, while in 5% of the reports both humans and animals were affected.
The finding that MCs (42%; 79 out of 189) have been the cyanotoxins most commonly reported in-, and causally related to- cyanobacterial intoxications is not surprising since the cyanobacterial genera which produce these heptapeptides (e.g. Fig. 1 ) are also of worldwide distribution (Huisman et al. ). NOD has been least often causally implicated (2%) in the reported cases of cyanobacterial poisoning cases. 15% of all the poisoning cases were assigned due to UR and 17% due to N/A (APPENDIX S1 - S6). It is acknowledged that a large number of the cases regarding cyanobacterial poisoning were documented in the previous Century, when specific methods for cyanotoxin analysis were not widely available and before the development of modern methods with improved specificity and quantification, with lower minimum detection limits (Meriluoto et al. ). Insufficient veterinary training and awareness in the public health community necessary to recognize cyanotoxin poisonings, as well as limited access to validated, cost-effective diagnostic tests may also have contributed to lack of data of these important health events (Elder et al. ; Backer et al. ).
Despite improvements in the awareness of the symptoms and consequences of exposure to cyanobacterial mass populations and cyanotoxins, current and projected increases in cyanobacterial populations due to increasing anthropogenic pressures and climate change (Huisman et al. ) suggest that further reports of poisoning events will occur. Guidelines and regulations in developed countries can promote the regular and pro-active monitoring of freshwater cyanobacterial populations and (some) cyanotoxins, but the actual number of poisoning cases in countries with no such guidelines or regulations could be higher than hitherto reported. The gathered data suggest that future research should be orientated towards the creation of robust and precise, yet inexpensive and more widely available, analytical techniques for cyanotoxin detection, as well as toward better understanding of other potential toxic cyanobacterial compounds that could affect human and animal health, as well as the ecosystem as a whole. Also, further evaluation and analysis of cyanobacterial toxicity in both aquatic and terrestrial environments are of high importance.
Discussion on study limitations and recommendations for further investigations
Cyanobacteria in surface waters are well known for their ability to form toxic blooms, scums and mats which can jeopardize animal and human health (Carmichael , ; Codd et al. , , ; Huisman et al. ). The health concerns related to cyanotoxins in addition to the advances in science and technology over the last 25 years have expanded the number of studies in this field. This has further led to a dramatically increased state of knowledge of the cyanotoxins. However, some unavoidable limitations and influencing factors remain: Publications: the survey is based only on published reports with variable degrees of verification and expert peer review. The reports in general range from papers in refereed journals of international repute, to the “grey literature” of (usually non-refereed) technical and project reports. Since an oral tradition of recognizing cyanobacterial blooms or scums exists (e.g. Griffiths ), it is possible that associated health incidents have also occurred but without subsequent publication. The true extent of such events, both historically and today, may thus be greater than evidenced in the literature; Motives for and circumstances applying to publishing reports of cyanotoxins and associated adverse health events: these have changed versus time. Early investigations may have been mainly prompted by scientific curiosity and by the need to warn water users of perceived health hazards. However, the development of cyanobacterial risk management measures and a duty of care, whether including voluntary guidelines or legislation (Chorus ), have increasingly recommended, or specified, cyanotoxin analysis (mainly for MCs), among the measures to be applied in situation assessment. These developments may have inevitably contributed to the growing environmental database of cyanotoxin occurrence around the world; Almost half of the publications (47%; 221 out of 468) originated from Europe (128 out of 468), North and Central America (93 out of 468). Furthermore, published research on cyanotoxins appears to be more limited in Asia (17%; 78 out of 468), South America (13%; 63 out of 468), Africa (12%; 55 out of 468) and Australia including New Zealand (11%; 51 out of 468). The centralization of publication in some of the wealthier countries of the world could be conditioned by the continuing, relatively high cost of equipment and reagents for the analysis of cyanotoxins. The lesser quantity of publications from Asia, South America, Africa, and Australia could be misleading; however, thus more global monitoring studies are needed to fully assess the spatial distribution of toxic cyanobacterial blooms, and particularly of cyanotoxins to help to formulate guidelines and regulations for their risk management; Analytical developments: contributions to the global database have occurred during a period of rapid improvements in methods for the extraction, identification and quantification of cyanotoxins and of increases in the availability and dissemination of improved methods (Meriluoto and Codd ; Meriluoto et al. ). Thus, analyses of environmental samples using modern methods are yielding data which could not have been obtained in earlier studies at the same sites; Infrastructure and financial support: despite improvements in analytical techniques, access to specialist equipment, technical and interpretative skills (e.g. LC–MS/MS; Meriluoto et al. ) and high financial costs will undoubtedly continue to limit cyanotoxin monitoring activity in several countries. Also, the number of researchers and scientific projects dealing with cyanobacteria, i.e. the scientific tradition, varies from country to country, and this has an influence on the quality and quantity of the research; Focus on MCs: with their potency, persistence and demonstrated causative roles in animal and human intoxications, most cyanotoxin research effort and resources have centred on the toxicology, environmental occurrence and fates of MCs (Metcalf and Codd ; Merel et al. , ; Svirčev et al. ). To what degree the considerably larger database of MC occurrences, versus those for the other cyanotoxins, is due to the greater effort expended on MC analyses is unclear; Studies on cyanotoxins beyond MCs: MCs have been the primary or only targets in many earlier studies and the number of ecosystems affected by other cyanotoxins may have been underestimated. Ecosystem studies targetting further cyanotoxins are necessary; Continuing lack of validated analytical standards for cyanotoxins and cyanobacterial reference materials: whilst the availability of analytical standards for cyanotoxins, rather than simply research reagents, to aid environmental identification and quantification has increased over past decades, significant gaps remain, e.g. for neurotoxins including ATX-a(S) and the non-proteinogenic amino acids. This limited availability influences the focus of analytical effort towards cyanotoxins for which standards are more readily available; Focus on aquatic environments: the widespread development of cyanobacteria in water resources used by humans and animals, plus the focus of research into waterborne intoxications involving cyanobacteria and their toxins, has led to an overwhelmingly aquatic database. However, cyanobacteria are also common inhabitants of terrestrial habitats, with mass populations occurring as, e.g. biocrusts and rock varnishes, in loess formations and in symbioses (Whitton ; Svirčev et al. ). Few reports are available on cyanotoxins in terrestrial environments, although examples of MCs in cyanobacterial desert crusts in Qatar (Metcalf et al. ) raise the likelihood of human exposure to wind-blown cyanotoxins. It is necessary to point out that this survey was based on reports generated over many years. Over this period, the following influential factors have been developing: (a) understanding and recognition of signs of cyanobacterial poisoning; (b) reporting systems; (c) monitoring and analytical methods—extraction/recovery methods, sensitivity, specificity, applicability in the field, etc. These factors can lead to overestimates and to underestimates. Furthermore, the global distribution of cyanotoxins seems highly likely because (a) cyanobacteria are cosmopolitan; (b) the molecular phylogeny of cyanotoxin genes indicates that the production of MCs (and probably NODs) originated in ancestral cyanobacteria before the branching into the diverse taxa which exist today (Rantala et al. ). It should be emphasized that we do not know the true global extent of cyanotoxins and associated poisonings: we are only collating and evaluating the known and reported occurrences of these phenomena. Their true extents are likely to be greater.
Based on the findings from our investigations, the question remains: do blank areas on the maps indicate the absence of cyanobacterial blooms, cyanotoxins and associated intoxications, or an insufficiency of those who are able to recognize, investigate, interpret and report them? Future challenges regarding cyanotoxin distribution in the world should also include answering the question of whether the cyanotoxins are always species-specific or whether they may also be ecosystem-specific, taking horizontal gene transfer into consideration.
Conclusions
An initial database of cyanotoxin global distribution, with a historical overview of the reported associated intoxication cases, has been assembled and assessed. This could be the basis for future collections of reports worldwide. Most countries in which investigations into cyanotoxin occurrence were performed were European (25). MCs were the cyanotoxins detected in two-thirds of the investigated freshwater ecosystems. Lakes were the most abundant of the investigated freshwater ecosystems (520 from 869 freshwater ecosystems in total). The cyanobacterial genera most commonly found were Microcystis spp. (669), Anabaena spp. (397), Aphanizomenon spp. (100), Planktothrix spp. (98), and Oscillatoria spp. (75), all well known as actual or potential cyanotoxin producers.
References (72%; 337 out of 468) were mostly published after 2000, which is consistent with the unprecedented growth in the analysis, toxinology and ecotoxicology of cyanotoxins. 38% (177 out of 468) of the papers reported on animal and/or human poisoning cases during the whole of the investigation period, with a lower percentage of references in recent decades (2000–2018; 21%; 70 out of 334) compared to that in the period from the 1950s until the end of the 1990s (77%; 92 out of 119).
Toxic cyanobacterial blooms have affected both animals and humans, with most reports of intoxications resulting in animal deaths. In freshwater ecosystems globally, MCs and ATX were the most commonly identified and causally inferred cyanotoxins in poisoning incidents in which cyanotoxin analyses were performed. All of the investigated types of cyanotoxins were found to have been present in poisoning episodes in Europe, whereas in Asia, this was only the case with MCs. However, almost half of the health incidents associated with exposure to cyanobacteria worldwide have not been accompanied by specific cyanotoxin analysis, indicating a continuing international need for improved awareness, and the sharing of technological capabilities for cyanotoxin identification and quantification.
Whilst some countries or regions have a high density of investigated cyanotoxin-poisoning events, large blank areas on the map, lacking data, are also apparent. The ubiquity of cyanobacteria, their common ability to produce cyanotoxins and the increasing anthropogenic demands upon water resources require further awareness-raising, research and technology transfer to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the distribution and negative impacts of cyanobacterial mass populations and cyanotoxins on freshwater ecosystems and water users.