Introduction
Cancer is the second commonest cause of death among children. The most frequent types of childhood cancer are leukemias (mainly acute lymphoblastic leukemia), cancers of the central nervous system (mainly astrocytomas and embryonal tumors), and lymphomas (mainly Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma) and, with the exception of infant cancers, all tend to arise somewhat more frequently in boys than in girls. The age-adjusted incidence rates show a substantial geographic variation, both for all childhood cancers together and for individual diagnostic groups. For example, highest rates of total cancer in children aged 0–14 years are found among Los Angeles Hispanics in the USA, non-Maori in New Zealand and Scandinavian countries (ca. 150–160 per million children) while lowest rates are found in Germany, Hong Kong, Slovakia, the Czech Republic and the UK (England, Scotland and Wales) (ca. 120–130 per million children) (Kaatsch ). Furthermore, during recent decades the incidence of most childhood cancers in Europe and the USA shows a consistent and accelerating increase, averaging 1–2% per year, which is unlikely to be the result of improved diagnostic procedures (Steliarova-Foucher et al. ). Taking also into account the short latency of childhood cancer, the possibility should be considered that the regional and temporal changes in childhood cancer incidence may be influenced by variations in the exposure of pregnant women to environmental factors including, among others, diet, lifestyle, and infection, as well as exposure to environmental carcinogens (Kleinjans et al. ). Such a possibility is compatible with the long-recognised higher susceptibility of the growing fetus to environmental influences as a consequence of the presence of rapidly proliferating cells, including stem cells, ongoing differentiation and poor development of immune defense and detoxification mechanisms (Barton et al. ). This implies that the fetus may be targeted by environmental chemicals and suffer genetic or epigenetic changes which alter its developmental programming in ways that make the newborn more susceptible to disease. This suggestion, which accords with the hypothesis of the developmental origins of disease (Barker ), is supported by a number of key observations in humans as well as in experimental animals. Thus, a large fraction (possibly upto 50%) of childhood cancers appears to be initiated by critical genetic events which occur in utero. For example, as discussed in more detail later, most cases of acute lymphoblastic leukemia are associated with driver mutations (chromosomal aberrations resulting in the generation of fusion genes) which are also found in neonatal blood spots or cord blood of the diseased children, indicating that they represent a genetic event which occurs prior to birth and leads to a clinically silent pre-leukemic clone (Greaves ). Evolution of such a clone to clinical disease requires one or more additional hits which occur in only a very small fraction (of the order of 1%) of children bearing the initial genetic damage. Evidence of analogous in utero events resulting in the initiation of certain types of childhood brain tumors also exists (Marshall et al. ). Experimental studies in animals demonstrate the ability of many chemicals which cause cancer after administration to adult animals to do so also in the offspring following exposure of the pregnant mothers (Anderson et al. ). Animal studies also show that, after administration during pregnancy, various chemicals modify organ development and lead to increased susceptibility to post-natal carcinogenic exposures (Lantz et al. ; Rudel et al. ; Parodi et al. ; Seachrist et al. ). Further support for the susceptibility of the fetus to environmental toxins comes from human studies which demonstrate the link between in utero exposure to particular environmental chemicals and adverse birth outcomes (e.g., reduced fetal growth, preterm birth) as well as non-cancer health effects (e.g., obesity, cognitive, and motor deficits) (Wigle et al. ).
As far as carcinogenesis after in utero exposure in humans is concerned, the only proven examples concern ionizing radiation and the drug diethylstilberstrol. In utero exposure to ionising radiation (environmental or medical) causes leukemia and various solid cancers (stomach, thyroid, breast, brain, and others) (Preston et al. ; Wakeford et al. ). Diethylstilbestrol, an estrogenic drug administered to pregnant women to prevent miscarriage, was found to cause in the daughters of treated women vaginal and cervical adenocarcinoma as well as breast cancer (Conlon ). These cancers tend to appear mostly at ages beyond 20 years and thus cannot be considered as childhood cancers, while some fall in the age-group 15–24 years known as ‘teenage and young adults’. Nevertheless, their occurrence underlines the potential of prenatal exposure to alter the risk of cancer in the offspring.
Here we review the evidence relating to the possible role of the exposure of pregnant mothers to environmental carcinogens in the causation of childhood cancer. In view of the weakness of the epidemiological evidence directly linking exposure with childhood cancer incidence, we focus our discussion primarily on population-based biomarker studies. In this context we discuss primarily the evidence concerning the potential of environmental carcinogens to cross the placenta, reach fetal tissues and cause therein macromolecular damage or other cellular perturbations which, in adults, are known to indicate increased future cancer risk. Furthermore we concentrate on evidence regarding maternal exposure to carcinogenic chemicals, although we fully recognize the important role of other environmental factors, such as nutrition and infections, as well as the relevance of the exposure of the fathers prior to conception and of the children after birth.
Epidemiological evidence
The epidemiological investigation of the links between in utero exposure to environmental chemicals and cancer in the offspring is challenging and many of the published studies suffer from a number of weaknesses. The relative rarity of childhood cancer limits the size and therefore the statistical power of such studies, and for this reason the balance of evidence tends to be drawn from pooled or meta-analyses. Additionally, the heterogeneity of the various reported studies is increased by variations in design, including widely different age limits of the cases examined as well as diverse modes of exposure assessment. Exposure assessment in particular constitutes a major problem, usually being based on information collected from the mothers retrospectively and therefore subject to recall bias. In addition, most reported studies focused on mixed exposures, or used exposure assessment metrics of relatively limited accuracy, e.g., based on proxies rather than actually measured exposure levels. Taking air pollution as an example of a highly relevant exposure, although during recent years new modelling methodologies, ranging from land use regression models to satellite-based data, have become available, allowing greatly improved estimates of exposure, many of the published studies used relatively inaccurate approaches based on limited data, e.g., small numbers of measurements of specific pollutants or proxies of limited relevance. Finally, as already mentioned, many studies fail to focus specifically on maternal exposure during pregnancy, while few refer to exposure during specific sub-periods despite the possible existence of gestation stage-specific susceptibility.
Table 1 , which is based primarily on the conclusions of recent pooled or meta-analyses, summarises the bulk of the epidemiological evidence regarding childhood cancer and its links with maternal exposure specifically during pregnancy. The exposures which have attracted most attention primarily concern known or suspected human carcinogens to which there is widespread exposure of pregnant women and include, among others, tobacco smoke, traffic-related air pollution, pesticides and related chemicals, and volatile organic chemicals present in household products. Unfortunately some of the studies were based on exposures which occurred during gestation but also included varying periods (sometimes of the order of 10 years) after birth, making it difficult to identify risks arising from fetal exposures. Although findings related to exclusively post-natal exposures are not discussed in the Table, it is worth noting that in some cases statistically significant positive associations with cancer risk were reported in contrast to null or weaker findings in relation to exposure during gestation (e.g. Boothe et al. ; Filippini et al. ). As can be seen in Table 1 , there is suggestive epidemiological evidence of an association between certain in utero exposures and childhood cancer (e.g., tobacco smoke, benzene and pesticides mainly in relation to childhood leukemias, arsenic in relation to adult cancers), however in general the findings are limited and inconsistent. For this reason the epidemiological evidence needs to be supplemented with information drawn from biomarkers and other sources.
Table 1 Epidemiological studies of in utero exposures and childhood cancer Target exposure References Study details Exposure assessment Childhood cancer type Conclusions Air pollution (traffic-related) Boothe et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of four studies; age < 4–14 years depending on the study Multiple air pollution metrics (traffic density, vicinity to repair garages and petrol stations, measured or modelled NO 2 and benzene air concentrations) at birth address Leukemia No significant association Summary OR 0.92, 95% CI 0.78–1.09 Heck et al. ( ) USA; case–control; 69 cases of ALL and 46 cases of AML, 19,209 controls, age < 6 years Air concentrations of specific chemicals from community-monitoring stations near birth address Leukemia Significant positive associations Significant increases in risk of ALL with 3rd trimester exposure to PAH (OR = 1.16, 95% CI 1.04–1.29), arsenic (OR = 1.33, 95% CI 1.02–1.73), benzene (OR = 1.50, 95% CI 1.08–2.09), 1,3-butadiene (OR = 1.54, 95% CI 1.19–1.99), m-/p-xylene (OR = 1.33, 95% CI 1.05–1.69), lead (OR = 1.42, 95% CI 1.02–1.96) and perchloroethylene (OR = 1.42, 95% CI 1.02–1.96) Significant increases of risk of AML with 3rd trimester exposure to chloroform (OR = 1.30, 95% CI 1.00–1.69), benzene (1.75, 95% CI 1.04–2.93), toluene (OR = 1.50, 95% CI 1.04–2.16) and m-/p-xylene (OR = 1.37, 95% CI 1.01–1.85) Sun et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of 11 studies; age < 5–15 years depending on the study Traffic density at residence during pregnancy or post-natally upto diagnosis (studies not distinguished) Leukemia No significant association Summary OR: 1.03, 95% CI 0.98–1.09 Filippini et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of 26 studies of which 4 focused on exposure only during pregnancy; age < 4–15 years depending on the study Traffic density at birth address; NO 2 as a proxy for traffic-related pollution; benzene Leukemia No significant association Traffic density in high-quality studies with exposure window which included gestation as well as post-birth exposures: OR = 1.07, 95% CI 0.93–1.24; similar result with studies focusing on exposure at maternal residence at birth; OR = 0.97, 95% CI 0.89–1.06 NO 2 and benzene regardless of exposure window: OR = 1.21 (95% CI 0.97–1.52) and 1.64 (95% CI 0.91–2.95), respectively. When stratifying by leukemia type, the results based upon NO 2 were OR = 1.21 (95% CI 1.04–1.41) for ALL and 1.06 (95% CI 0.51–2.21) for AML; based upon benzene, OR = 1.09 (95% CI 0.67–1.77) for ALL and 2.28 (95% CI 1.09–4.75) for AML Heck et al. ( ) USA: case–control; 140 germ cell tumors, 254 retinoblastomas, 80,224 controls; age < 5 years Modelled air concentrations of CO at birth address Various cancers Significant positive associations significant increase in risk of ALL (OR = 1.05; 95% CI: 1.01–1.10), germ cell tumors (OR = 1.16; 95% CI: 1.04–1.29) and retinoblastoma (OR = 1.11; 95% CI: 1.01–1.21); findings on leukemias included in meta-analysis by Filippini et al. ( ) Janitz et al. ( ) USA; case–control; 307 cases, 1013 controls, age < 20 years Traffic density and LUR-modelled NO 2 at birth address Leukemia No overall significant association for either exposure metric with risk, but significant association of AML risk with 4th quartile NO 2 exposure (OR = 5.25, 95% CI 1.09–25.26) Symanski et al. ( ) USA; case–control; 1248 cases, 12,172 controls, age < 5 years Air concentrations of benzene, 1,3-butadiene and polycyclic organic matter modelled from data of monitoring stations near birth address ALL Significant positive associations Significant increase in risk of ALL with exposure to 1,3-butadiene (OR = 1.29, 95% CI 1.08–1.52); marginally non-significant associations with benzene (OR = 1.17, 95% CI 0.98–1.39)and polycyclic organic matter (OR = 1.11; 95% CI 0.94–1.32) von Ehrenstein et al. ( ) USA; case–control; 43 primitive neuroectodermal tumors, 34 medulloblastomas, 106 astrocytomas, and 30,569 controls; age < 6 years Air concentrations of specific chemicals from community-monitoring stations near birth address Brain tumors Significant positive associations Significant increases in risk of primitive neuroectodermal tumors with exposure to acetaldehyde (OR = 2.30; 95% CI 1.44–3.67), 1,3­butadiene (OR = 2.23; 95% CI 1.28–3.88), benzene (OR = 2.14, 95% CI 1.12–4.06) and toluene (OR = 2.14, 95% CI 1.38, 3.32), and of medulloblastoma with PAH (OR = 1.44; 95% CI 1.15–1.80) Alcohol Latino-Martel et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of 21 studies; age < 2–20 years Maternal recall of frequency of consumption during pregnancy Leukemia Significant positive association Significant increase in risk of AML (OR = 1.56; 95% CI 1.13–2.15) Milne et al. ( ) Australia; case–control; 388 ALL cases (870 controls), 302 brain tumor cases (941 controls); age < 14 years Maternal recall of frequency of consumption during pregnancy ALL, brain tumors No evidence of a positive association, but evidence of inverse associations Comparison of no vs any alcohol during pregnancy ALL, OR = 0.62, 95% CI 0.48–0.61; OR < 1 for consumption 0–2 and > 2 days/week, p for trend = 0.001 brain tumors, OR = 0.75, 95% CI 0.56-1.00; OR < 1 for consumption 0–2 and > 2 days/week, p for trend = 0.18 Orsi et al. ( ) France; case–control; 636 cases ALL, 100 cases AML, 1421 controls; age < 15 years Maternal recall of frequency of consumption during pregnancy Leukemia No significant association Any leukemia, OR = 1.0; 95% CI 0.8–1.2, dose–response trend p = 0.70 ALL, OR = 1.0; 95% CI 0.8–1.2, dose–response trend p = 0.38 AML: OR = 1.3; 95% CI 0.8-2.0, dose–response trend p = 0.02 Arsenic Liaw et al. ( ) Chile; case–control; 89 cases with different types of cancer, 395 controls, age < 19 yrs Time of pregnancy in relation to a 2-year period of known high contamination of drinking water Leukemia, brain, liver, all cancers No significant association for subjects exposed in utero and as young children (upto 2 years of age) Leukemia: males, OR = 0.8, 95% CI 0.5–1.3; females, OR = 0.7, 95% CI 0.4–1.2 Brain cancer: males, OR = 0.4, 95% CI 0.1–3.2; females, OR = 0.8, 95% CI 0.2–3.7 Liver cancer: males, OR = 1.2, 95% CI 0.1–11.5; females: OR = 1.2, 95% CI 0.1–11.5; pooled: OR = 1.2, 95% CI 0.2–5.9 All other cancers: males, OR = 0.6, 95% CI 0.3–1.0; females, OR = 1.4, 95% CI 0.9–2.2 Yorifuji et al. ( ) Japan; case–control; study size unspecified; age at death from cancer 9–58 years Time of pregnancy in relation to period of known contamination of milk powder All cancers Significant positive associations Mortality from total and liver cancer was significantly or almost significantly elevated among subjects exposed during gestation and up to age 1 year Benzene Zhou et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of 29 studies; age < 15–16 years depending on the study Occupational or household use of benzene-containing solvents, paints or petroleum products ALL Significant positive association Significantly increased risk of ALL: OR = 1.25, 95% CI 1.09–1.45 Carlos-Wallace et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of 13 studies with data on exposure during gestation; age < 1–19 years depending on the study Various proxies, including occupational and household use of benzenes and solvents, traffic density, and traffic-related air pollution Leukemia Significant positive associations Significantly increased risks of all types of leukemia with maternal exposure through occupation and use household products: sRR 2.06 (95% CI 1.51–2.81); RR higher for AML than ALL; sRR for maternal exposure based on traffic density, traffic-related air pollution models, or gas station residential proximity not significantly increased Pesticides/insecticides/herbicides Turner et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of 15 studies; age < 22 months–20 years depending on the study Maternal recall of indoor residential use All cancers Significant positive associations Significantly increased risks of all leukemias, or ALL only, with exposure to unspecified residential pesticides: OR = 1.54; 95% CI 1.13–2.1 and OR = 2.04; 95% CI 1.54–2.68, respectively Significantly increased risks of all leukemias, ALL and AML, with residential exposure to insecticides (OR = 2.05; 95% CI 1.80–2.32, OR = 2.14; 95% CI 1.83–2.50 and OR = 1.85; 95% CI 1.29–2.64, respectively) Significantly increased risks of all leukemias, or ALL only, with residential exposure to herbicides (OR = 1.61; 95% CI 1.20–2.16 and OR = 1.73; 95% CI 1.28–2.35, respectively) Bailey et al. ( ) Pooled analysis of 13 studies; age < 10–18 years depending on the study Occupational exposures; individual-level data from different studies used to estimate harmonised exposure estimates using job exposure matrices Leukemia Significant positive associations Significantly increased risk of AML (OR = 1.94; 95% CI 1.19–3.18) Bailey et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of 12 studies; age < 10–14 years depending on the study Maternal recall of residential pesticide use Leukemia Significant positive associations Significantly increased risks of ALL with any pesticide exposure (OR = 1.43, 95% CI 1.32–1.54) Significantly increased risks of AML with any pesticide exposure (OR = 1.55, 95% CI 1.21–1.99) Booth et al. ( ) USA; ecological; 664 leukemia cases, 691 CNS/PNS cases, total at-risk population (children < 4 years) 1,639,649 Crop density at birth address Leukemia and central/peripheral nervous system cancers Significant positive associations Significantly positive exposure–response relationships for dry beans and total leukemias (RR per 1% increase in crop density = 1.09, 95% CI 1.03–1.14), ALL (RR = 1.10, 95% CI 1.04–1.16) Significantly positive exposure–response relationships for oats and AML (RR = 2.03, 95% CI 1.25–3.28) Significantly positive exposure–response relationships for sugar beets and total leukemias (RR = 1.11, 95% CI 1.04–1.19) and ALL (RR = 1.11, 95% CI 1.02–1.21) Limited evidence of associations with risks of CNS cancer Chen et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of 16 studies; age < 9–19 years depending on the study Maternal recall of residential use before and after birth up to diagnosis All cancers Significant positive associations observed for exposures (a) during gestation and after birth until diagnosis and (b) only after birth until diagnosis; implies that the effects may be due to post-natal exposures Significantly increased risk of leukemia and lymphoma with exposure to indoor but not outdoor residential insecticides (OR = 1.47; 95% CI 1.26–1.72 and OR = 1.43; 95% CI 1.15–1.78, respectively) Significantly increased risk of leukemia exposure to herbicides (OR = 1.26; 95% CI 1.10–1.44) Non-significantly increase risk of brain tumors with pesticide or herbicide exposure Polychlorinated organic chemicals Bonde et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of 21 studies; age range unspecified Focus on Category 1 endocrine disruptors (EU classification), mostly polyhalogenated organic chemicals; concentrations of chemicals in maternal, cord or adult (prediagnostic) biospecimens, assumed to serve as proxies of pregnancy exposures owing to their long persistence Testicular cancer No significant association All exposures: summary OR = 1.20, 95% CI 0.78–1.89 DDE: summary OR = 1.19, 95% CI 0.60–2.36 DDT: OR = 1.12, 95% CI 0.82–1.55 Tobacco smoking Metayer et al. ( ) Meta-analysis and pooled analysis of 12 studies; age < 14 years Maternal recall of smoking during pregnancy AML Overall no significant association, but in pooled analysis significant association in Hispanics (OR = 2.08, 95% CI 1.20–3.61) Rumrich et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of 62 studies; age < 11 months—19 years depending on the study Maternal recall of smoking during pregnancy All cancers Significant positive associations Significantly increased risks of brain and CNS tumors (OR = 1.09; 95% CI 1.02–1.17) and lymphoma (OR = 1.21; 95% CI 1.05–1.34); latter association did not hold up to subgroup analyses Milne et al. ( ) Australia; case–control; 388 cases, 868 controls, age < 15 yrs Maternal recall of smoking during pregnancy ALL No significant associations Any maternal smoking vs none During conception year: OR = 1.07, 95% CI 0.81–1.42 During pregnancy: OR = 1.02, 95% CI 0.76–1.37 VOCs Ruckart et al. ( ) USA; case–control; 13 cases, ca. 130 controls; age < 20 years Exposure to drinking water VOCs (di-, tri- and tetrachloroethylene, vinyl chloride, benzene) at birth address, estimated by modeling Leukemia and NHL (evaluated together) Non-significantly increased risks with first trimester exposures to tetrachloroethylene (OR = 1.6, 95% CI 0.5–4.8) and vinyl chloride (OR = 1.6, 95% CI 0.5–4.7) Bailey et al. ( ) Pooled analysis of 13 studies; age < 15–18 years depending on the study Maternal recall of occupational use of paint Leukemia No significant association ALL: pooled OR = 0.81 (95% CI 0.39, 1.68) AML: pooled OR = 1.31 (95% CI 0.38, 4.47) Huoi et al. ( ) Pooled analysis of three studies; age < 15 years Occupational exposure (based on job exposure matrices) to PAH, diesel motor exhaust, asbestos, crystalline silica, and metals CNS tumors No significant associations PAH: OR = 0.91, 95% CI 0.61–1.35 Diesel motor exhaust: OR = 0.81, 95% CI 0.49–1.35 Asbestos: OR = 1.03, 95% CI 0.65–1.63 Crystalline silica: OR = 0.69, 95% CI 0.33–1.47 Metals: OR = 1.32, 95% CI 0.47–3.75 Aschengrau et al. ( ) USA; case–control; 31 cases, 1357 controls; any age (mean age of participants 29.1 years) Exposure to drinking water tetrachloroethylene at birth and residence addresses upto age 5 years, estimated by modelling All cancers (evaluated together) Non-significantly increased risk of cancer (RR = 1.8, 95% CI 0.8–4.0); most common cancer among exposed was cervical cancer Shown first are meta-analyses published since 2010 followed by individual studies not covered by meta-analyses. The conclusions indicated refer specifically to the association of maternal exposure during pregnancy unless otherwise stated; results are also discussed for studies which do not distinguish between exposure only during pregnancy from that including also post-natal exposure until diagnosis (indicated in column “exposure assessment”); studies which focus only on child exposure after birth are not included
Mechanistic considerations
Before discussing the evidence from biomarker studies it is useful to outline briefly a number of mechanistic considerations which can help place such evidence into the perspective of the pathogenesis of cancer in childhood or later life.
A key molecular mechanism through which environmental exposures can interfere with the developmental programming of the fetus, including its stem cells, and modify the long-term disease susceptibility of the organism, involves changes in its epigenetic status. In particular, the cycles of DNA demethylation and de novo methylation which occur during the early stages of fetal development provide critical windows of susceptibility at which environmental chemicals, including chemicals which do not exhibit carcinogenicity in adults, may exert a long-lasting influence on fetal programming which can impact on future health trajectories (Mathers and McKay ; Dietert ). Studies in adult former smokers have shown that a fraction of the changes in DNA methylation caused by tobacco smoking can still be detected decades after the cessation of smoking (Guida et al. ). The implication of this, as far as the origins of childhood cancer are concerned, is that epigenetic perturbations induced in the fetus by maternal exposures occurring during the limited period of pregnancy may well survive beyond the end of these exposures at birth and exert their impact on gene expression and tissue function at a later stage under the influence of future developmental or environmental cues (Ghantous et al. ).
As will be discussed later, a substantial body of data accumulating through gene expression or epigenetic profiling studies concerns the effects of transplacental exposures on genes related to the immune system. During fetal life, the immune system undergoes important physiological changes, some of which occur only once during particular phases of ontogenesis. Consequently any interference of environmental toxins with the processes of maturation of the immune system can result in long-term inappropriate control of immune and inflammatory responses, including susceptibility to chronic inflammation which is linked to various diseases including cancer (Leifer and Dietert ). Indeed developmental immunotoxicity forms part of the “delayed infection” hypothesis of childhood leukemia, according to which dysfunctional immunoregulation acquired during fetal development facilitates carcinogenesis upon subsequent infection (Greaves ). It follows that the effects of environmental exposures on the fetus, especially those concerning the expression or the epigenetic status of immune system-related genes, must be evaluated while having in mind the potential long-term role in carcinogenesis of a malfunctioning immune system.
Fetal exposure to environmental carcinogens
One of the functions of the placenta is to limit the contact of the fetus with harmful chemicals present in the mother’s blood. However, such protection is not complete and in practice varying fractions of such chemicals pass through the placenta and enter the fetal blood circulation. One way by which the extent to which this happens has been evaluated for numerous chemicals, including carcinogens of environmental significance, has been through in vitro placental perfusion studies (Myöhänen and Vähäkangas ). These studies have shown that the filtering efficiency of the placenta varies from almost 100% to practically zero, depending on the chemical, and that carcinogens belonging to practically all chemical classes (e.g., metals, polycyclic aromatic and polyhalogenated hydrocarbons, aromatic and aliphatic amines) can cross the placenta to some degree. An important limitation of the reported in vitro placental perfusion studies, which invariably make use of term placentas, needs to be mentioned. This relates to the fact that the permeability, via passive diffusion or active transport, of the placenta varies significantly during the different stages of gestation. This happens because of physiological changes in the structure of the placenta (e.g., the thickness and elaboration of the villous trees and the vasculosyncytial mebrane affecting the efficiency of passive diffusion, or the electrical gradient between the maternal and fetal circulations, affecting the exchange of charged molecules such as metal ions) or changes in the expression of genes related to transporter proteins or enzymes of xenobiotic metabolism (Proullac et al. ; Burton et al. ; Staud et al. ). For example, the observed decrease in negative potential on the fetal side as pregnancy advances from early trimester to midgestation and term implies a decrease and increase, respectively, in the fluxes of cations and anions towards the fetus. Thus permeability studies making use of term placentas may give a misleading picture regarding the degree of protection provided by the placenta to the fetus during critical windows of the latter’s development.
Once they enter fetal circulation, environmental toxins come into contact with the developing organism’s tissues where they may cause chemical or biological alterations, sometimes after undergoing appropriate metabolism. Although its system of xenobiotic metabolism is still immature, the fetus has significant capacity to metabolically activate many carcinogens (Myllynen et al. ). Furthermore there is evidence that metabolic activation can also take place in the placenta itself. For example, in vitro perfusion of human placenta with benzo[a]pyrene results not only in the passage of the chemical to the fetal compartment but also in the formation in the placental tissue of precarcinogenic benzo[a]pyrene-DNA adducts (Karttunen et al. ).
A reliable means of evaluating fetal contact with environmental chemicals in humans is based on the use of biomarkers of exposure. Such biomarkers include the concentrations of chemicals of interest or their metabolites in cord blood (and maternal peripheral blood for the evaluation of the corresponding exposure of the pregnant mother) as well as, for chemicals which bind covalently to cellular macromolecules, the corresponding levels of DNA or protein adducts. As can be seen in Table 2 , biomarkers of fetal exposure have been measured in cord blood for a large number of known or suspected carcinogens and other toxins, including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, arsenic, aflatoxin B1, acrylamide, polychlorinated hydrocarbons and various metals. In many of these studies, associations between higher environmental levels of the chemicals in question and higher levels of maternal and fetal biomarkers of exposure were observed, while in some cases quantitative correlations between biomarker levels in cord and maternal peripheral blood were demonstrated.
Table 2 Biomarkers of transplacental exposure to environmental carcinogens in fetal tissues; selected studies covering all reported exposures Exposure References Findings Acrylamide Schettgen et al. ( ) von Stedingk et al. ( ) Hemoglobin adducts of acrylamide and glycidamide (metabolite of acrylamide) measured in maternal and cord blood; maternal and cord blood levels correlate Acrolein, crotonaldehyde Chen and Lin ( ) 1,N2-propano-2′-deoxyguanosine-DNA adducts measured in placenta Aflatoxins Hsieh and Hsieh ( ); Turner et al. ( ); Groopman et al. ( ) Various aflatoxins (including aflatoxin B1) and aflatoxin B1-albumin and DNA adducts measured in maternal and cord blood and in placenta Arsenic Jin et al. ( ); Miklavčič et al. ( ); Claus Henn et al. ( ); Parajuli et al. ( ); Ettinger et al. ( ) Concentrations of total arsenic as well as various arsenic metabolites in cord and maternal blood measured in many regions (e.g., China, Bangladesh, Thailand, USA, Canada, and Europe) Asbestos fibres Haque et al. ( ) Fibres detected in lung, liver, skeletal muscle, and placenta of stillborn infants Benzene Funk et al. ( ) Benzene oxide–hemoglobin adducts measured in dried blood spots of newborns Bisphenol A Chou et al. ( ); Cao ( ); Nahar et al. ( ) Chemical measured in maternal and cord blood as well as in fetal liver, kidney and placenta; concentrations in cord blood lower than in maternal blood; concentrations in placenta lower than in fetal liver Bulky DNA adduct-producing exposures Godschalk et al. ( ); Pedersen et al. ( ); Topinka et al. ( ) Pedersen et al. ( ) Adducts measured in DNA from maternal and cord blood leukocytes; similar and correlating levels in maternal and cord blood; higher adduct levels observed in pregnant women who smoke, live in traffic polluted areas or consume charbroiled meat with dark surface Dioxins, PCB and organochlorine pesticides Reviewed in Aylward et al. ( ) Koppen et al. ( ); Pathak et al. ( ); Patayová et al. ( ); Sexton et al. ( ); Hsu et al. ( ); Ulutaş et al. ( ) Various chemical species, including large numbers of PCB congeners, measured in maternal and cord blood; cord and maternal blood concentrations correlate Heavy metals Baeyens et al. ( ); Kim et al. ( ); Arbuckle et al. ( ) Various metals, including Cd, Pb, Mn, and Hg measured in maternal and cord blood; Cd concentrations in cord blood significantly higher than in maternal blood Methylating agents Georgiadis et al. ( , ) O6-methylguanine a DNA adduct formed preferentially by N-nitroso compound-type methylating agents measured in maternal and cord blood leukocytes; maternal and cord blood levels strongly correlate, slightly higher in mothers Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) Sexton et al. ( ) PAHs measured in maternal and cord blood; cord levels tend to be higher than thus in maternal blood Reviewed in Perera et al. ( ) Pratt et al. ( ) PAH-DNA adducts measured in maternal and cord blood leukocytes and placenta; cord blood adducts similar to or slightly higher than in maternal blood; adduct levels increase with maternal exposure to ambient air PAHs with no evidence of a threshold Rossner et al. ( ) PAH-DNA adducts measured in the placenta of smoking mothers Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDE) Reviewed in Linares et al. ( ); Chen et al. ( ); Shin et al. ( ) Various PBDE congeners measured in maternal and cord blood; maternal and cord blood levels correlate Pesticides/herbicides/insecticides Whyatt et al. ( , ); Silver et al. ( ) Large number of pesticides detected in maternal and cord blood; maternal and cord blood levels correlate Phthalates Jensen et al. ( ) Diethylhexyl- and di-isopropylnonyl-phthalate metabolites measured in amniotic fluid and maternal and cord blood Ochratoxin Jonsyn et al. ( ) Chemical measured in maternal and cord blood Oxidative stress Arab et al. ( ) 1,N6-ethenodeoxyadenosine and 3,N4-ethenodeoxycytidine DNA adducts measured in maternal and cord blood leukocytes; levels in cord blood lower than in maternal blood, strong maternal-cord blood correlations Rossner et al. ( ) 8-Hydroxyeoxyguanosine measured in cord blood lymphocyte DNA from pregnant women who smoked or were exposed to air pollution during pregnancy Volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) Dowty et al. ( ); Boyle et al. ( ) Various VOCs, including benzene, dichloromethane, chloroform, measured in maternal and cord blood and maternal urine; some found at higher concentrations in cord blood
Biomarker levels in cord blood generally tend to be similar to or lower than those in maternal blood, although in some cases (e.g., polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons—PAH’s) the fetus appears to have a higher susceptibility than the mother (Perera et al. ). The dose–response relationships which govern the accumulation of fetal biomarkers of exposure have rarely been reported, one exception concerning exposure to PAH’s in ambient air and the accumulation of related DNA adducts in cord blood leukocytes, where a trend towards increasing adduct levels at higher exposures and the absence of a threshold has been reported (Perera et al. ). There is evidence that the quantitative relationships between fetal DNA damage and maternal exposure can be modified by inherited or acquired factors. For example, the relationships between air pollution exposure and PAH-DNA adducts in cord blood are influenced by the maternal haplotype in CYP1B1, XRCC1 and GSTM3 and the fetal haplotype in CYP1A2, XRCC1 and NQO1, all of which are involved in carcinogen metabolism or DNA repair (Wang et al. ; Iyer et al. , ). The influence of both types of haplotypes implicates a contribution by both maternal and fetal metabolism in the generation of the DNA adducts. In addition to its modulation by genetic variation, the adverse impact of maternal exposure to air pollution on cord blood leukocytes is also influenced by maternal diet, with the consumption of fruits and vegetables and the presence of higher concentrations of tocopherol and carotenoids in maternal sera being associated with lower levels of DNA adducts (Kelvin et al. ; Pedersen et al. ).
Induction in the fetus of precarcinogenic damage
The studies summarised above conclusively demonstrate that many environmental carcinogens to which pregnant mothers are exposed reach the fetus. This raises the question whether such fetal exposure leads to cellular damage mechanistically relevant to carcinogenesis. In this context it should be noted that certain types of carcinogen-DNA adducts, in addition to serving as biomarkers of exposure as described above, play a critical role in the mechanism of carcinogenesis and, as such, can also be considered to represent biomarkers of precarcinogenic damage and cancer risk. For example, the levels of DNA adducts of PAHs, certain aromatic amines and aflatoxin B1, as well as bulky DNA adducts (a type of heterogenous and chemically uncharacterized DNA damage formed by certain carcinogens), measured in peripheral blood or in other tissues of adults, have been demonstrated in prospective population studies to serve as independent predictive biomarkers of cancer risk (Poirier ).
The most commonly employed biomarkers of early biological effects of carcinogens are related to genetic damage and include chromosomal aberrations, micronuclei, and gene mutations. As for DNA adducts mentioned previously, the levels of chromosomal aberrations and micronuclei in peripheral blood cells of adults are validated biomarkers predictive of the risk of future appearance of cancer (Norppa et al. ; Bonassi et al. ). As such they constitute a valuable tool in molecular epidemiology for linking environmental exposures with cancer risks. These biomarkers have been extensively employed in studies of childhood cancer; however, it should be remembered that whether their levels in cord blood have an analogous predictive value is currently unknown. On the other hand, as already mentioned, a large fraction of childhood cancers (e.g., most cases of acute lymphoblastic leukemia) appear to involve multiple mutagenic hits, the first of which already occurs in utero.
Evidence from a large number of studies clearly shows that in utero exposure to environmental carcinogens causes in the fetus genetic damage mechanistically linked to carcinogenesis and/or has been demonstrated to reflect increased cancer risks in adults. The conclusions of studies upto 2004 have been previously reviewed (Neri et al. , ), while an overview of later studies is provided in Table 3 which covers all exposures for which biomarkers of early effects on fetal tissues have been reported. It can be seen that a few exposures, including tobacco smoke, air pollution, endocrine disruptors and arsenic, owing to their known carcinogenicity in adults, high prevalence of exposure and mechanistic evidence of possible in utero toxicity, have attracted a substantial number of studies.
Table 3 Biomarkers of early effects of environmental carcinogens in fetal tissues—selected studies demonstrating the impact of maternal exposure to environmental carcinogens Exposure Biomarker References Conclusions Aflatoxins DNA methylation Hernandez-Vargas et al. ( ) 115 pairs of maternal and cord blood; in cord blood leukocytes 71 CpG sites associated with levels of aflatoxin–albumin adducts in maternal blood; related genes include growth factor genes such as FGF12 and IGF1, and immune-related genes such as CCL28, TLR2 and TGFBI Air pollution Micronuclei Pedersen et al. ( ) 75 maternal and 69 paired cord blood samples; micronucleus frequency in cord blood correlated with residential traffic density ( β = 0.4, SE 0.2, p < 0.02); micronucleus levels in maternal blood were higher than p < 0.0001 and did not correlate with those in cord blood Milosevic-Djordjevic et al. ( ) Ambient environmental contamination (mainly PCBs, nickel and chromium in air and groundwater) affects micronucleus frequencies in cord blood of 1 day-old babies: micronucleus frequencies/1000 binucleated cells, high contamination ( N = 22) mean = 9.36, SD = 5.60; low contamination ( N = 25) mean = 5.53, SD = 3.02 O’Callaghan-Gordo et al. ( ) Micronucleus frequencies in 181 samples of maternal blood, but not those in 183 samples of cord blood, correlated with modelled PM2.5 levels at the birth address Chromosomal aberrations Orjuela et al. ( ) Frequency of stable chromosomal aberrations in cord blood lymphocytes correlated with airborne PAH exposure measured by personal monitoring of mothers in third trimester DNA methylation Herbstman et al. ( ) Global DNA methylation in 164 samples of cord blood leukocytes correlated negatively with third trimester maternal exposure to PAH measured by personal monitoring but positively with the presence of detectable PAH-DNA in cord blood leukocytes, suggesting that loss in DNA methylation was not mediated by DNA adducts Kingsley et al. ( ) Living close to a major roadway was associated with reduced methylation of LINE1 ( p = 0.03) in 215 placentas Lee et al. ( ) LINE1 methylation in 217 samples of cord blood correlated inversely with the presence of detectable PAH-DNA ( β = − 0.010, p = 0.038) Alcohol HPRT mutations Bigbee et al. ( ) HPRT mutant frequencies in 60 cord blood samples were significantly associated with maternal consumption of alcohol at the beginning [Relative Rate (RR) = 1.84, 95% CI 0.99–3.40, p = 0.052] and during pregnancy (RR = 2.99, 95% CI 1.14–7.84, p = 0.026) Arsenic Oxidative damage and protein expression Ahmed et al. ( ) In samples from 130 women (Bangladesh, high exposure), urinary As measured during pregnancy correlated (positively or negatively) with multiple markers of oxidative stress in placenta and cord blood, including 8-oxoG, IL1β, TNFα, IFNγ, IL-1β, IL-8, suggesting effects of As on immune function Proteomics Bailey et al. ( , ) In 50 samples of cord blood (Mexico, high exposure), maternal urinary As levels during pregnancy correlated with levels of 111 proteins in cord blood serum; altered proteins related to inflammation and cell development/proliferation, TGFb-, and MAPK-signaling pathways DNA methylation and gene expression Rojas et al. ( ) Genome-wide DNA methylation and gene expression analysis in 38 samples of cord blood leukocytes (Mexico, high exposure); maternal urine As correlated with DNA methylation 4771 CpG sites; differential methylation and expression, in association with As exposure, was found for 16 genes, all highly enriched for binding sites of the early growth response (EGR) and CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) transcription factors DNA methylation Intarasunanont et al. ( ) In 71 samples of cord blood (Thailand, high exposure), toenail and finger As levels correlated positively with methylation at the p53 promoter ( r 2 = 0.023–0.061, p < 0.05) but not with LINE1 methylation Kile et al. ( ) Maternal arsenic exposure was associated with an increase in methylation at LINE1 and the p16 promoter in maternal and cord blood in 114 pairs of sample (Bangladesh, high exposure) Koestler et al. ( ) Maternal urinary As correlated with an increase in CD8 and a decrease in CD4 T-lymphocytes in 134 cord blood samples (USA, low exposure); no statistically significant correlation of exposure with CpG methylation was any site, but there was evidence of an effect on CpG island regions Kile et al. ( ) Maternal urinary As correlated with an increase in CD8 and a decrease in CD4 T-lymphocytes in 44 cord blood samples (Banglatesh, high exposure); in genome-wide DNA methylation analysis, significant associations were found with 1 CpG site and 24 pathways related to diabetes, hematopoiesis and the renin–angiotensin system Broberg et al. ( ) Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis on 127 samples of cord blood (Bangladesh, high exposure); stronger effects were observed in males than in females and for exposures in late than in early gestation; significant associations with maternal urinary As were found for 3 CpGs in males (none in females); pathway analysis showed overrepresentation of affected cancer-related genes in males but not in females Cardenas et al. ( ) Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis on a set of 45 samples of placenta, umbilical artery and umbilical vain cells (Bangladesh, high exposure); significant associations with maternal urinary As were found for 1 CpG in artery and 4 CpG’s in placenta, and for the Melanogenesis and insulin signaling pathways in all three tissues, as well as various other pathways (including cancer-related pathways such as Wnt- and p53-signaling) in individual tissues Phookphan et al. ( ) Maternal As exposure correlates with reduced DNA methylation in the promoters of COX2, EGR1 and SOCS3 genes in 41 cord blood leukocytes with high exposure relative to 40 samples with lower exposure (Thailand); the same DNA hypomethylation, accompanied by overexpression of the same genes, was found in saliva collected from the same subjects at age 9 years Green et al. ( ) In 341 samples of placenta (USA, low exposure), arsenic concentration correlated (mostly negatively) with methylation at 163 CpG sites miRNA expression Rager et al. ( ) Maternal urine As correlated with increased expression of 12 miRNAs and with up- or downregulation of 334 mRNAs in 40 samples of cord blood leukocytes (Mexico, high exposure); pathways altered related to cancer, inflammatory disease and others Metabolomics Wei et al. ( ) In a metabolomics (LC–MS) analysis of 35 cord and 20 matched maternal blood sera (Bangladesh, high exposure), arsenic exposure correlated with elevated levels of 17-methylstearate, laurate (12:0) and 4-vinylphenol sulfate in cord sera and butyrylglycine and tartarate in maternal sera Laine et al. ( ) In a metabolomics (NMR) analysis of 10 cord blood sera (Mexico, high exposure), 10 metabolites correlated with maternal urinary arsenic and 17 with cord serum concentrations; altered metabolites are indicative of changes in pathways related to vitamin metabolism, the citric acid (TCA) cycle, and amino acid metabolism Bisphenol A DNA methylation Nahar et al. ( ) 12 matched fetal liver, kidnely and placenta samples; total BPA concentrations were positively associated with global methylation for the placenta only using the LINE1 assay ( β = 0.225, p = 0.002) Brominated trihalomethanes Micronuclei Stayner ( ) Micronucleus frequency in maternal ( N = 214) but not cord ( N = 223) blood lymphocytes correlated with brominated trihalomethanes in residential water for exposure during the first [rate ratio (RR) = 1.05; 95% CI 1.00–1.11] and second trimesters (RR = 1.03; 95% CI 1.00–1.06) and through all routes of BTHM exposure during the first trimester (RR for 1 µg/week = 3.14; 95% CI 1.16–8.50) Cadmium and cotinine DNA methylation Sanders et al. ( ) 17 pairs of maternal and cord blood; promoter methylation correlated with Cd concentration in 61 genes in cord blood and in 92 genes in maternal blood, and with cotinine concentration in 366 and 134 genes, respectively; the affected genes were associated with apoptosis, control of gene expression, cell cycle and developmental processes CALUX-reactive chemicals Micronuclei Pedersen et al. ( ) DR- and AR-like activities (CALUX assay) were similar in 98 pairs of maternal and cord blood serum samples, but cord blood ER-like activity was higher than in maternal sera (22.6 vs 18.5 units). All three types of CALUX signals correlated between cord and maternal blood sera, especially AR-like activity (Spearman r = 0.8, p < 0.001) Dioxin-like chemicals DR-CALUX ® Vafeiadi et al. ( ) DR-like activity was higher in maternal than in cord samples in 967 pairs of samples and showed modest correlation between the two (Spearman r = 0.18) Multiple chemicals including metals, persistent halogenated hydrocarbons, phthalates, DR-CALUX-reactive chemicals Global gene expression Remy et al. ( ) In 215 pairs of maternal and cord blood samples, 918 genes in cord blood leukocytes were associated with the levels HCB in maternal blood, 845 with DDE, 711 with PCB-153, 311 with PFOA, 133 with DR-CALUX activity, 102 with PFOS, and 65 with MECPP; corresponding pathways included those related to insulin receptor, IL6, prolactin, PPAR and large number of immune function-related pathways PBDE/DDT/DDE DNA methylation Huen et al. ( ) 358 matched sets of maternal and cord blood and peripheral blood at age 9 years; in cord blood, higher maternal exposure to DDT/DDE correlated with reduced Alu1 methylation ( p < 0.02) and higher combined DDT/DDE/PBDE exposure with reduced LINE1 methylation; sex-specific effects noted Zhao et al. ( ) Levels of BDE-66 and BDE-209 in 80 samples of maternal blood were associated with decreased LINE-1 methylation in matched placentas ( β = − 0.9, 95% CI − 1.8 to − 0.1, and β = − 1.0; 95% CI − 1. 9 to − 0.1, respectively); BDE-153 was associated with decreased methylation of NR3C1 ( β = − 2.0, 95% CI − 3.7 to − 0.2) and IGF2 ( β = −1.7; 95% CI − 3.0 to − 0.4) Dao et al. ( ) In 46 pairs of maternal and cord blood, high maternal PBDE concentrations correlated with reduced methylation of TNFα promoter and increased protein levels in cord blood in female, but not in male, offspring Phthalates Zhao et al. ( , ) Maternal urinary concentrations of phthalate metabolites mehhp and sumdehp were negatively associated with dna methylation in line1 and in the growth-related in igf2 gene in 119 placenta samples Tobacco smoking Micronuclei Zalacain et al. ( ) Increased MN frequency in 41 cord blood lymphocyte samples from smoking mothers (median = 4, range 1–10.5) compared to 102 non-smokers (median = 3, range 0–8; p = 0.016) Chromosomal aberrations Ramsey et al. ( ) Increased frequency of chromosomal translocations in 6 cord blood lymphocyte samples from smoking mothers compared to 8 non-smokers ( p = 0.029) Pluth et al. ( ) Increased CA frequency in 8 cord blood lymphocyte samples from smoking mothers (mean = 0.21%, SD 0.16%) compared to 32 non-smokers (mean = 0.11%, SD 0.21%; p = 0.045) de la Chica et al. ( ) Increased CA frequency in 25 samples of amniocytes from smoking mothers compared to 25 non-smokers; structural chromosomal abnormalities: smokers 12.1%, non-smokers 3.5% ( p = 0.002); metaphases with chromosomal instability: smokers 10.5%, non-smokers 8.0%, ( p = 0.04), chromosomal lesions: smokers 15.7%, non-smokers 10.1% ( p = 0.045) de la Chica et al. ( ) Increased frequency of MLL gene rearrangements at 11q23 in 20 samples of amniocytes from smoking mothers compared to 20 non-smokers: smokers 0.34%, non-smokers 0.12% ( p = 0.001) Bennett et al. ( ) Frequencies of chromosomal translocations in lymphocytes from peripheral blood of mothers and the fetal side of the placenta were not associated with cigarette smoking, possibly owing to the low level of cigarette usage in these subjects HPRT mutations Bigbee et al. ( ) No difference in overall frequency of HPRT mutations in cord blood from 14 smoking and 19 non-smoking mothers; however, the frequencies of V(D)J recombinase-associated exon 2–3 deletions were 57.1% of smoker mutants and 26.3% in those of the non-smokers ( p = 0.011) Keohavong et al. ( ) Increased frequency of illegitimate V(D)J recombinase-mediated deletion of HPRT exons 2–3 in 104 samples of cord blood lymphocytes from smoking mothers compared to 103 non-smokers: 48.2% of mutants in mothers who smoked during pregnancy, 34.9% in never-smoking mothers ( p = 0.08), 32.7% mothers who were never smokers or who quit during pregnancy ( p = 0.043) Grant ( ) Pooled analysis of data from three studies; tobacco smoke exposure in utero induces HPRT mutations in the cord blood, and passive maternal exposure has a similar effect as active maternal smoking: mean frequencies/10 6 = 0.73 (SD = 0.51) in never smokers, 1.38 (SD = 1.36; p < 0.006) in passive smokers, 1.27 (SD = 0.93; p = 0.014) in mothers who quit during pregnancy, 1.16 (SD = 0.91; p = 0.007) in active smokers throughout pregnancy DNA methylation Joubert et al. ( ) Meta-analysis of data from 13 cohorts; genome-wide DNA methylation analysis in cord blood leukocytes using the Infinium 450 k Human Methylation platform; 3932 CpGs (after adjustment for white blood cell composition) differentially methylated in smokers; corresponding genes related to smoking-induced diseases Flom et al. ( ) Peripheral blood granulocytes from 88 women, mean age 43 years, whose mothers smoked ( N = 32) or did not smoke ( N = 56) during pregnancy; inverse association between DNA methylation of Sat2 repetitive elements and maternal smoking status ( β = −0.22, 95% CI −0.40 to − 0.03) Rotroff et al. ( ) Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis in cord blood leukocytes from 685 newborns, using the Infinium 450 k Human Methylation platform; methylation at 27 CpGs and 15 genes correlated with nicotine levels in maternal blood; the differentially methylated genes are associated with 51 pathways related to cancer, cell cycle, ERα receptor signaling, and angiogenesis, immune system function
Tobacco smoke Although tobacco smoke may be considered as a lifestyle-related, rather than an environmental exposure, it is well worth considering in some detail in the context of the current discussion because it constitutes a prevalent exposure with well-defined health effects in adults as well as in utero, therefore providing a good opportunity for the evaluation of working hypotheses and research tools. As indicated in Table 2 , tobacco smoking during pregnancy results in the formation of multiple types of damage to the DNA of cord blood leukocytes, including PAH-DNA and bulky DNA adducts as well as the oxidative lesion 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (Godschalk et al. ; Rossner et al. ; Topinka et al. ). In addition, increased levels of chromosomal aberrations and micronuclei have been observed in the cord blood of babies born to women who smoked during pregnancy (Ramsey et al. ; Pluth et al. ; Zalacain et al. ). As already mentioned, all of these types of genetic damage have been linked to the mechanism of carcinogenesis and/or their accumulation in blood leukocytes of adults has been shown to be indicative of higher risk of cancer.
Higher levels of chromosomal aberrations were also found in amniocytes obtained from the fetuses of smoking pregnant women, including a high frequency of rearrangements at the 11q23 locus and the associated MLL gene (de la Chica et al. , ). MLL gene fusions play a critical role in the pathogenesis of infant leukemia and there is strong evidence that they arise prenatally, implying that in utero exposure to genotoxins may contribute to their formation (Greaves ). Limited epidemiological and experimental evidence supports the suggestion that this type of mutation can be caused by chemicals with topoisomerase II inhibitor properties, including metabolites of benzene (a component of tobacco smoke), certain pesticides as well as chemicals present in various household products, all of which have been tentatively implicated (see Table 1 ) in the causation of childhood cancer (Alexander et al. ; Thys et al. ; Lu et al. ; Hernández and Menéndez ).
Yet another type of genetic damage found at increased levels in the cord blood of pregnant women who smoked, or suffered exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, during pregnancy is represented by 6-thioguanine-resistant T-lymphocytes which arise as a result of mutations in the hypoxanthine–guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) gene (Keohavong et al. ; Grant ). In addition to an increased frequency of such mutants in pregnant smokers, a change in the spectrum of mutations was also observed, consisting of a shift towards illegitimate genomic deletions mediated by V(D)J recombinase, a recombination event associated with childhood leukemias (Finette et al. ; Bigbee et al. ; Grant ).
The above discussion shows that the evidence from biomarkers of genotoxicity clearly points to in utero exposure to tobacco smoke resulting in the induction in fetal tissues of genetic damage of relevance to the pathogenesis of childhood leukemia. Biomarkers of genotoxicity, such as those discussed above, belong to an older generation of biomarkers of the early effects of carcinogens and in recent years they have been supplemented with a new generation of biomarkers based on the use of high-density profiling technologies. In particular, the changes in DNA methylation of cord blood leukocytes caused by maternal smoking have been examined using genome-wide searches in multiple studies. A meta-analysis of 13 such studies (Joubert et al. ) identified altered methylation at nearly 4000 CpG sites. Some of these changes appear to be long lived, being observed in peripheral blood leukocytes of the offspring of smoking women well into adulthood (Flom et al. ; Richmond et al. ). Among CpG sites which suffer long-lived demethylation are sites associated with the AHRR (Ah receptor repressor) and CYP1A1 (cytochrome P450 1A1) genes, both of which are involved in xenobiotic metabolism, while the former in addition plays an important role in the regulation of cell growth, differentiation and immune system function (Suter et al. ; Novakovic et al. ). Significantly, both of these genes, as well as the RUNX1 (Runt Related Transcription Factor 1) gene, which is also epigenetically altered by maternal smoking, are frequently found to be similarly demethylated also in childhood ALL (Nordlund et al. ), thus providing some support for the possible existence of a causal link between the two.
Further functional analysis of the genes which are differentially methylated in cord blood from smoking mothers shows that they play a role in immune function and are associated with a number of cancers, including acute myeloid leukemia, lung, breast and colon cancer (Joubert et al. ; Rotroff et al. ). Importantly, some of these genes are also related to diseases and conditions known to be induced in the offspring of smoking mothers, such as asthma and orofacial clefts, supporting the idea that epigenetic changes observed in cord blood may have a broader biological relevance.
Very recently it was reported that the frequency of leukemogenic chromosomal deletions in tumor samples obtained from children with ALL correlates with in utero exposure to tobacco smoke (de Smith et al. ). Given that tobacco smoke causes a global loss of DNA methylation (Breton et al. ; Flom et al. ), in turn known to lead to genomic instability which plays a role in carcinogenesis (Brennan and Flanagan ), it is possible that, in addition to their potential long-term effects on gene expression, in utero-induced epigenetic changes may also contribute to genetic aberrations leading to cancer.
Summarising the findings regarding in utero effects of tobacco smoking, the existing evidence clearly demonstrates that tobacco carcinogens reach the fetus, where they give rise to a range of alterations (DNA damage, chromosomal aberrations, gene mutations and epigenetic changes) which are directly relevant to childhood leukemia, adding biological plausibility to the tentative epidemiological indications that this exposure may increase the risks of childhood cancer.
Urban air pollution Turning to urban air pollution, an established carcinogen in adults, increased levels of DNA damage, micronuclei, chromosomal aberrations and HPRT mutations have been observed in cord blood cells obtained from women living in areas with high levels of air pollution (Perera et al. ; Milosevic-Djordjevic et al. ; Bocskay et al. , ; Pedersen et al. ; Orjuela et al. ). In adults all these biomarkers are associated with carcinogenesis and they are predictive of increased carcinogenic risk. Currently little other information is available regarding the effects of urban air pollution on fetal tissues, except that exposure to air pollution-related PAHs is associated with loss of global DNA methylation in cord blood lymphocytes (Herbstman et al. ).
Endocrine disruptors Environmental chemicals with endocrine disrupting potential (e.g., polychlorinated hydrocarbons, various pesticides, bisphenol A and others) reach the fetus (Table 2 ). Endocrine disruptors include known human carcinogens (e.g., PCBs and dioxins), in utero human exposure to such chemicals is associated with multiple types of birth effects and non-cancer conditions in childhood (Wigle et al. ) while in utero treatment of experimental animals results in sensitization of the offspring to subsequent exposure to carcinogens (Seachrist et al. ). For these reasons there are concerns that in utero exposure to endocrine disruptors may increase the risk of childhood cancer.
Chemicals belonging to the category of endocrine disruptors can be detected in human tissues as a class via functional in vitro assays (predominantly the CALUX ® assay) which exploit their ability to activate the estrogen, androgen and dioxin receptors (ER, AR and DR, respectively) (Eichbaum et al. ). Use of this type of assays has demonstrated in numerous studies the presence of endocrine disruptors in maternal and cord sera (Pedersen et al. ; Vafeiadi et al. ; Iszatt et al. ). DR-CALUX ® activities (likely to reflect the presence of PCBs and dioxins) in cord sera correlate with micronucleus frequencies as well as with the levels of malonedialdehyde-DNA adducts (a biomarker of the oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids) (Pedersen et al. ; Merlo et al. ). This implies that, even though PCBs and dioxins lack direct genotoxic activity, they may cause clastogenic damage by inducing oxidative stress (Dalton et al. ). Further support for a possible association between CALUX ® -reactive chemicals, oxidative stress and the induction of micronuclei comes from the finding that, out of seven genes whose expression correlated with micronucleus frequency, six (all related to cell replication or DNA damage responses) were also associated with the levels of CALUX ® signals or malonedialdehyde-DNA adducts (Merlo et al. ).
The presence of CALUX ® -reactive chemicals in cord blood has been found in a number of studies to be associated with sex-specific gene expression responses, with male newborns showing substantially larger numbers of responding genes (Huen et al. ; Dao et al. ; Remy et al. ). Male-specific genes responding to DR-CALUX ® chemicals include genes related to TNFα-NFκB signaling, involved in the regulation of the cell cycle and apoptosis and associated with cancer and ALL in particular (Hochstenbach et al. ). Importantly, sex-specific associations of gene expression were also found in connection with micronucleus frequencies, with males again showing a much larger number of correlating genes, including a significant number of genes related to leukemia and lymphoma. All these observations of male-specific associations parallel the known higher susceptibility of males to childhood ALL and are compatible with a contribution of endocrine disruptors to the etiology of the disease. Decreased global as well as gene-specific methylation in cord blood leukocytes following maternal exposure to different endocrine disrupting chemicals has been consistently found (Dao et al. ; Zhao et al. , , ), however no information regarding the sex specificity of these effects has been reported.
Arsenic A final example that is of interest to discuss is arsenic, an established carcinogen in adults to which large numbers of people are exposed via contaminated drinking water. Direct evidence linking in utero exposure with childhood cancer is very limited (Engel and Lamm ; Liaw et al. ; Yorifuji et al. ), however exposure of pregnant women to high concentrations of arsenic in drinking water has been linked to non-cancer developmental effects in children as well as to increased risks of cancer at multiple sites in adulthood (Smith et al. ; Naujokas et al. ; Steinmaus et al. ). Perhaps because arsenic is known to be a weak genotoxin, no studies on the association of arsenic exposure with genotoxicity-related biomarkers in fetal tissues have been reported. On the other hand, attention has focused on effects on gene expression and, especially, DNA methylation, which have been described in numerous studies, including studies conducted on populations exposed to relatively low levels of arsenic (e.g., in the USA) [for reviews see (Bailey and Fry ; Bailey et al. )]. Genome-wide gene expression and proteomic analyses in cord blood leukocytes showed increases in the expression of genes which play important roles in immune response, inflammation and carcinogenesis, e.g., genes involved in the activation of the TGFβ- and MAPK-signaling pathways which are highly relevant to carcinogenesis (Fry et al. ; Ahmed et al. ; Bailey and Fry ), as well as changes in the expression of miRNAs which regulate analogous processes (Rager et al. ). Furthermore, many studies have found changes in DNA methylation in cord blood leukocytes and the placenta, some of which are linked to pathways related to cancer as well as other diseases, and have provided evidence of preferential susceptibility of males (Kile et al. ; Broberg et al. ; Rojas et al. ; Bailey et al. ; Green et al. ). Overall, gene expression and DNA methylation profiling demonstrate the induction in fetal tissues, even at low levels of exposure, of changes compatible with known health effects of arsenic in adults, however more evidence is required to illuminate the question of the possible involvement of in utero exposure in childhood cancer.
Discussion
The epidemiological evidence regarding the role of in utero exposure to environmental carcinogens in the causation of childhood cancer is currently inadequate or at best provides only suggestive answers. On the other hand, the overall biomarker-based evidence discussed above indicates clearly that many environmental carcinogens to which pregnant women are exposed do reach the fetus and give rise in fetal tissues to different types of perturbations which are of mechanistic relevance to carcinogenesis and in adults are predictive of increased cancer risk. This is compatible with the strong evidence that childhood cancer is a multi-hit process with the first, genetic hit often occurring in utero.
Taken by itself, biomarker-based evidence does not provide definitive proof of links between in utero carcinogenic exposures and the etiology of childhood cancer. However it brings important mechanistic insights which may add significantly to the evidence required to resolve this important question. For example, in the case of tobacco smoke, the data regarding induction in fetal tissues of multiple types of genetic damage, all of which are predictive of cancer risk in adults, supplemented by data on gene expression and epigenetic profiling, consistently strengthen the suggestive epidemiological evidence of a role of this exposure in childhood leukemia.
The combined use of multiple types of biomarkers, including omic profiling, enriches significantly the arsenal of molecular epidemiology and offers a number of synergistic advantages. Firstly, biomarkers of fetal exposure provide objective and individualized measures of exposure (usually chemical-specific) which, if combined with multiple maternal sampling during the limited critical period represented by the duration of gestation, can lead to reliable integrated estimates of in utero exposure. Secondly, thanks to the validated properties of certain biomarkers of genotoxicity as independent cancer risk predictors in adults, measurement of such biomarkers in cord blood can provide a basis for anchoring mechanistically informative omic profiles on cancer risk phenotypes. Clearly the utility of such an approach will remain tentative until confirmation of the risk predictivity of biomarkers measured in fetal tissues is achieved. Finally, whereas older types of biomarkers of early effects of carcinogens focus on genotoxicity, omic profiling makes possible the examination of the early effects induced by all kinds of environmental chemicals regardless of their mode of toxicity. Of particular relevance in relation to transplacental carcinogenesis, omic profiling allows the examination of the effects on the fetus of non-genotoxic carcinogens (e.g., some endocrine disruptors) as well as of chemicals which are not currently classified as carcinogens but may increase cancer risks by altering susceptibility at the fetal stage. This makes it possible to complement the study of specific candidate chemicals as possible environmental causes of childhood cancer with a more agnostic approach, which is in accordance with the exposome paradigm (Robinson and Vrijheid ; Smith et al. ).
In practice most kinds of biomarkers can be measured in a limited number of accessible surrogate tissues, which in the case of the study of transplacentally-induced diseases is usually cord blood. Therefore, as briefly mentioned above, a key prerequisite for the exploitation of cord blood biomarkers is that their relevance to carcinogenesis in target tissues be established. Current evidence, outlined earlier in this review, provides some support for the relevance of smoking-induced changes in cord blood cells to non-cancer health effects of maternal smoking. Encouragingly, analogous supporting evidence comes from studies in adults of the changes caused by smoking to the genomic profiles of peripheral blood cells and their relevance to tobacco-induced diseases, including cancer (Georgiadis et al. ; Chatziioannou et al. ).
Proper testing and validation of the risk-relevance of cord blood biomarkers is dependent on the availability of prediagnostic samples derived from prospective mother–child cohorts with long-term follow-up, such as for example the uniquely empowered International Childhood Cancer Cohort Consortium (I4C), which combines information on maternal exposure, perinatally collected biosamples and prospective health follow-up of the children (Brown et al. ).The potential of biomarkers as tools for the investigation of the environmental causes of childhood cancer in the context of prospective mother–child cohorts is illustrated in Fig. 1 , where their utility in the context of human population biomonitoring programmes is also described. Omic profiling in combination with personalised, biomarker-based estimates of exposure can allow the characterisation at various levels (e.g., gene and protein expression, epigenetic status, metabolism) of alterations caused by specific exposures which may constitute part of the molecular initiating events of pathway perturbations associated with toxicity. In the context of biomonitoring programmes such alterations may be used to identify, via disease connectivity mapping, diseases which may be potential associated with particular exposures (Fig. 1 a). Furthermore some of the exposure-associated changes in omic profiles may represent signatures or fingerprints specific to the particular exposures which may be of use in the context of exposure assessment. On the other hand, evaluation of cord blood profiles in the context of case–control studies nested within post-natal follow-up can provide differential prediagnostic profiles reflecting early perturbations associated with disease risks. Comparison with exposure-associated profiles (Fig. 1 b) can help identify overlapping biological pathway perturbations associated with both exposure and disease pathogenesis, which may reflect etiologic mechanisms (Vineis et al. ). Finally and perhaps most interestingly, disease risk-associated differential omic profiles in prediagnostic samples (Fig. 1 c) provide a basis for an agnostic search for candidate etiologic exposures, or classes of exposures, via the identification of exposure-specific signals (Davis et al. ; Neveu et al. ) or fingerprints (Alexandrov et al. ), which can be subsequently followed up by knowledge-guided narrowing down of the search to specific environmental risk factors.
Fig. 1 Possible use of biomarkers in the context of human biomonitoring or prospective mother–child cohorts
Concluding remarks
Biomarker-based studies have provided consistent evidence demonstrating that many environmental carcinogens to which pregnant mothers are exposed can reach the fetus and induce there damage which in adults is known to be precarcinogenic. While the picture which emerges from such evidence is compatible with in utero carcinogenic exposures potentially contributing to the etiology of childhood cancer, being also in harmony with corresponding limited epidemiological evidence, at the present time the existence of such causal links can be no means be considered as established. Further progress in relation to this question may be achieved through molecular epidemiological research based on prospective studies which adequately address issues related to (a) size and statistical power, (b) accurate exposure assessment and (c) use of a combination of biomarkers, including omic profiling.
Search strategy and selection criteria
References for this Review were identified through searches of PubMed with the search terms “childhood cancer”, “(prenatal OR in utero OR transplacental OR fetal OR pregnancy OR gestation)”, “exposure”, and “carcinogens” from 1990 until October 2018. Articles were also identified through searches of the authors’ own files. Only papers published in English were reviewed. The final reference list was generated on the basis of originality and relevance to the broad scope of this Review.