Introduction
A nation-wide retrospective survey of cancer mortality in China, conducted in 1975–1978, gathered information on all causes of cancer deaths over the 3-year period from 1973 to 1975. The atlas of annualized mortalities of nine common cancers showed that cancer rates varied substantially from region to region (Li et al. ). The surprising degree of geographical variation provides a series of important etiologic hypotheses that can be further tested in analytical studies (Li et al. ). They could provide unique natural areas to explore the association between environmental factors and cancers.
Lung cancer is a neoplasm of the lung, trachea, or bronchus. Lung cancer mortality is generally higher in cities than in rural areas, but the highest female lung cancer rate was found in a rural county, Xuan Wei County in Yunnan Province of southwest China (Fig. 1 ). The male lung cancer rate in this county was also among the highest in China (Fig. 2 ). Although the increasing trend was found during the past three national cancer surveys in Xuan Wei, Yunnan, and China as a whole, Xuan Wei still shows much higher trends than that in Yunnan Province and China. Studies have shown that the age-standardized mortalities (1/10 5 ) of lung cancer in Xuan Wei and China during the three national cancer surveys of 1973–1975, 1990–1992, 2004–2005 were 24.5 vs 5.6, 38.9 vs 15.2 and 74.3 vs 20.2, respectively (Lin et al. ). In addition, within the whole Xuan Wei, the geographic location of lung cancer deaths also revealed remarkable heterogeneities. The high-mortality towns (ASMR > 80/10 5 ) of Laibin, Longchang, Wanshui and Shuang long in Xuan Wei had almost 20 times more mortality than the low-mortality towns of Reshui, Wenxing and Wude (Chen et al. ). Our recent study also found that the high lung cancer mortality rate was concentrated around the geometric center of Laibin town with some diffusion trends to the northeast part of Xuan Wei. Furthermore, the age peak of lung cancer in China appears at about 70 years old, while it is 55+ years old for both males and females in Xuan Wei (He and Yang ). In addition, these observations are noticeable because (1) this county belongs to Yunnan Province, which had an average lung cancer mortality lower than the national average; (2) lung cancer was the only type of cancer for which mortality exceeded the national average, and most other types of cancer exhibited mortality rates well below the national average; and (3) there were similar lung cancer mortality rates of men and women, while lung cancer rates are generally higher among men than women in other areas of China and the world.
Fig. 1 Map of China, showing the county-specific annual female lung cancer mortality rates in 1973–1975
Fig. 2 Map of China, showing the county-specific annual male lung cancer mortality rates in 1973–1975
Researchers found that although Xuan Wei is a rural county and agriculture is the main occupation for local people, it contains rich coal mineral resources (Historical-Records-Office 1999). By 1814, bituminous coal was recorded as one of the important local products being used extensively in households. Though available findings reveal a definite relationship between using bituminous coal and lung cancer in Xuan Wei, the etiology is by no means fully characterized yet (Li et al. ). Therefore, carcinogens in the combustion coals used in Xuan Wei need to be further characterized and assessed. Since the 1980s, potential risk factors such as tobacco smoking, industrial pollution, and indoor air pollution from household fuel combustion have been investigated. Industrial exposure and occupational factors were excluded because there were no major industrial factories in Xuan Wei before the 1960s (He and Yang ). Smoking was also excluded as the major risk factor because tobacco smoking is very rare among Xuan Wei women but common among men and yet the lung cancer mortality was similar among males and females in Xuan Wei (He and Yang ). As for ventilation status, it was customary to burn domestic fuel in a shallow, unvented pit in the floor of the family dwelling’s main room. After the national stove interventions from the government beginning in 1976, however, the mortality/morbidity rates still did not show a dramatic reduction in Xuan Wei. Further research showed that indoor smoky coal usage was strongly associated with lung cancer risk in Xuan Wei (Lan et al. ). Kim et al. explored the differential association between smoking and Xuan Wei lung cancer by coal types and reported that the smoky coal usage could attenuate the tobacco and Xuan Wei lung cancer risk, even at low exposures of hazardous smoky coal (Kim et al. ). Therefore, other suspected carcinogens have been proposed to test the roles of these components in Xuan Wei dangerous smoky coals and their combustion products.
In the current review, we focus on three specific aspects: (1) interventions—the results of the stove improvements and fuel replacement aimed at the dangerous coal type; (2) carcinogens—some might exist in the coal (radioactive substances and silica), and others could be formed during combustion (particulate matter, organic extract, free radicals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PASs) and alkylated PAHs, crystalline silica and chamosite); and (3) mechanisms—driver mutations, oxidative damage and inflammation, genetic susceptibility and epigenetic modulation.
What interventions have occurred?
Stove improvement
The Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine (CAPM) and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) previously cooperatively conducted a series of etiological studies to identify carcinogens involved in the etiology of Xuan Wei lung cancer (Mumford et al. ). Indoor air pollution in Xuan Wei residential settings was one of the first potential causes identified because the residents of Xuan Wei made daily use of fire pits in their homes. Researchers found that the houses were filled with dark smoke containing unoxidized carbon when the residents cooked indoors using fire pits (Chapman et al. ; Lan et al. ). The proportion of households using smoky coal did not change significantly for the past four decades (Chen et al. ). Therefore, the indoor air pollution in Xuan Wei residential settings attracted much attention.
Next, primary intervention to improve the stove situation was carried out in 1976 by installing chimneys to vent the smoke outdoors. To evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention, Lan et al. conducted a cohort study to assess the effectiveness of stove improvement: RRs of lung cancer mortality were 0.59 and 0.54 for males and females, respectively, after intervention (Lan et al. ). Although to some extent it proved the effectiveness of interventions for fire stoves and supported combustion coal smoke as a risk factor, it was still difficult to explain the obvious differences in the regions with high-, medium- and low-mortality rates (Hosgood et al. ; Tian ; Lee et al. ; Lan et al. ). Another study of the groups also showed that the PM 10 and B(a)P levels decreased after chimney installation, but there was still no significant decrease in the lung cancer mortality (Tian et al. , ). Furthermore, the age-standardized lung cancer mortality increased over the past three national cancer morality surveys (1973–1975, 1990–1992 and 2004–2005) (Lin et al. ), illustrating that lung cancer cases in Xuan Wei accounted for 56.86%, 58.43% and 63.03% of all cancer-related deaths, respectively. They also reported that among all the deaths diagnosed at Xuan Wei medical institutions at the county level or above, lung cancer deaths accounted for 96.96%, 94.34% and 96.40%, respectively (Chen et al. ).
These findings indicated that the stove type and lack of chimneys are not the primary reasons underlying the high lung cancer mortality of Xuan Wei. Furthermore, in our fieldwork study, we observed that although the chimneys are now prevalent in the region, they are not constructed tall enough to prevent exposure to smoke. The latest topographical study also showed that the region with higher lung cancer risk in Xuan Wei resembled a pocket-like area (PLA), which might contribute to the accumulation of the coal smoke in that region (Ren et al. ).
Fuel type
The main solid fuel mined in Xuan Wei contains two types of coal: bituminous coal (also called smoky coal) and anthracite coal (also called smokeless coal). In 1982, a notable milestone was made in searching for the carcinogens in Xuan Wei: smoky coal usage was associated with higher lung cancer risk statistically, especially for the smoky coal from Laibin and Longtan towns of Xuan Wei (He and Yang ; Lan et al. ). Compared with smokeless coal users in Xuan Wei, there was a 100-fold increased risk of lung cancer mortality for lifetime smoky coal users (Barone-Adesi et al. ). During combustion, smoky coal particles that contain multiple chemical components undergo complicated changes which result in vaporization into volatile and widespread smoke in the residential settings (Lee ). Moreover, occupational exposure in the smoky coal mines could increase the risk of lung cancer by fourfold (Hosgood et al. ).
Toxicological studies also found that the combustion products in the local smoky coal contained numerous tumorigenic and mutagenic components (Mumford et al. ). The analysis showed that compared to smokeless coal, the concentrations of nickel, iron, cobalt, magnesium, and manganese were higher, as were the total suspended particles (TSP) and benzo[a]pyrene (BaP). Through a bulk organic geochemical analysis, studies found differences in volatile organic compounds in two types of coal combustion, which was consistent with the results published in Science (Mumford et al. ). In addition, while the median ash yields for both smoky and smokeless coals were similar (around 32%), more than half of the particles from smoky coal emissions were below 1.0 µm (Mumford et al. ). Therefore, the particle size and components inside might affect the molecular pathway for Xuan Wei lung cancer carcinogenesis. In a recent study by Downward et al., the largest analysis to date of coal samples collected from local Xuan Wei residents was conducted. The results confirmed that the excess lung cancer risk in Xuan Wei resulted from exposure to domestic combustion of smoky coal (Downward et al. ).
In 2006, the findings in Xuan Wei, China, contributed to the evidence that led to the classification of household coal combustion as “carcinogenic to humans (Group I)” by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) (Straif et al. ). It is urgent to solve the more serious fuel-related health problems resulting from indoor coal combustion. However, as smoky coal is the only source of fuel energy in some towns of Xuan Wei, it is difficult for the local government to take actions to ban the residential smoky coal usage immediately. Therefore, conducting pretreatments or other measures, which target the carcinogens inside before the smoky coal is sold in the market, could become an alternative choice to reduce lung cancer risk in the future.
What carcinogens are present?
Radioactive substances
The World Health Organization (WHO) has categorized radon (Rn) as a carcinogen that can induce lung cancer. It is found that 220 Rn, released from smoky coal was more than the amount derived from coke or smokeless coal (Blot et al. ). In addition, smoky coal from the Laibin and Hongchong mines contains the largest concentration of 220 Rn, at 19,363 Bq/kg, while smokeless coal was at 8485 Bq/kg (He and Yang ). However, the association between Rn and lung cancer mortality in Xuan Wei was not supported by the multivariable logistic regression model analysis (OR = 0.498, 95% CI 0.429–5.227). They also tested the γ radiation levels (× 10 −8 Gy/h 1 ) in high-, mid- and low-lung cancer incidence areas in Xuan Wei and found that there were no statistical differences. All were close to the background level (Deng et al. ). Considering that the concentrations of all the other radioactive substances in the smoky coal are under the national standards, these substances should not be the primary carcinogens for Xuan Wei lung cancer.
Particulate matter
Distinct fine fractions (PM 10 , PM 2.5 ) and total suspended particles (TSPs) also received attention as potential lung carcinogens. PM 10 could not explain the excess lung cancer risk associated with bituminous coals: Huang et al. reported that, compared to the blank control group (no treatment), there were no significant pathological changes when they exposed the Xuan Wei bituminous coal dust PM 10 to the tree shrew bronchial epithelium (Chen et al. ). This outcome was also consistent with a previous study that indicated the concentration of particulate matter from smoky coal combustion (24.4 ± 3.3 mg/m 3 ) was similar to that of wood combustion (22.3 ± 2.0 mg/m 3 ) indoors (Mumford et al. ; Lan et al. ).
For PM 2.5 , the individual exposure and indoor 24 h PM 2.5 were also collected from local houses for analysis. The findings showed that there were obvious correlations between personal exposure and indoor PM 2.5 concentrations ( r = 0.7, p < 0.0001). However, the group with a low lung cancer mortality rate (0.7/10 5 ) preferred using wood as a solid fuel matter and showed higher PM 2.5 exposure (GM:289 µg/m 3 ) than the high lung cancer mortality rate group (109.3/10 5 ) in which the residents used coals in their daily life (GM:225 µg/m 3 ) (Hu et al. ; Mumford et al. ). Interestingly, the particle size distribution results for wood smoke in Xuan Wei varied from the existing literature (Rau ; Venkataraman and Rao ). One study indicated that 51% (by volume) of the particles from the bituminous coal smoke were below 1 µm based on microscope observations, whereas only 6% of the particles from wood were below 1 µm (He and Yang ; Mumford et al. ). In addition, black carbon, produced via incomplete combustion of solid fuels, is also an essential indicator of ambient air pollution. Downward adopted PM 2.5 absorbance (PM abs ) to measure black carbon in 30 villages in Xuan Wei and found that personal and indoor exposure to black carbon in Xuan Wei was modulated by fuel type and source (Downward et al. ).
In addition, the total suspended matter (TSP) in high incidence areas of lung cancer was 10.45 mg/m 3 , while in low incidence areas, the level was 2.57 mg/m 3 . Considering that TSP does not deposit in the thoracic region of the lung, it could not be a major underling cause of the high lung cancer mortality (He and Yang ). In summary, particulate matter alone could not explain the excess lung cancer risk associated with bituminous coals. Therefore, more attention is currently given to the roles of chemical or mineral components in the coal combustion particulate products.
Organic extract
Compared to anthracite coal (27%) and wood (57%), particle samples from bituminous coal combustion contain higher fractions of organic matter (72–82%) (Mumford et al. ). However, the results of the Ames test of mutagenic potencies (revertants per mg of organic extract) were found to be similar for emissions from the three fuels: bituminous coal, anthracite, and wood (Chapman et al. ). The test showed that the bituminous coal combustion did not exhibit high levels of mutations. However, in contrast, in other mouse skin tumorigenicity experiments, the response was much stronger for emission from the bituminous coal than anthracite coal and wood (Mumford et al. ). Based on the above data, organic extracts from bituminous coal still need further research.
Free radicals
The free radical concentrations in emission particles from different fuels (two smoky coals, one smokeless coal, and wood) correlate with the lung cancer mortalities in areas using these fuels (Zhou et al. ). Although the free radical intensity in the particles from the combustion of the bituminous coal in Xuan Wei was about 10 times that found in ambient PM collected in other Chinese cities and 100 times that from mainstream tobacco smoke (Zhou et al. ), Tian reported that carbon-based free radicals have the highest concentration in wood smoke (Tian et al. , ). However, those residents who used wood as a domestic fuel for cooking had low lung cancer rates. Therefore, additional experimental and epidemiological studies on the roles of free radicals are still needed.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and alkylated PAHs
In 1984, many of the PAHs in ambient air were recognized as carcinogens by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) (IARC , , ). The PAH fraction from a Xuan Wei bituminous coal sample accounted for 43% of the organic mass and 61% of the total mutagenicity (Chuang et al. ). Studies identified that PAH concentrations were the highest in bituminous coal smoke, followed by wood smoke and anthracite smoke, and PAH exposure was up to 6 times higher for smoky coal combustion compared to the smokeless type (Downward et al. ; Finkelman and Tian ; Mumford et al. ). BaP, which is the most toxic of the parent PAHs, is widely considered a key marker of PAHs, methylated PAHs and their derivatives (oxygenated PAHs: OPAHs and azaarenes: AZAs) in environmental health assessments. It was upgraded to a Group I known human carcinogen as well (IARC ). Although the concentration of BaP was higher in the high lung cancer incidence areas (Li ; Lui et al. ), no dose–response relationship was found between BaP from smoky coal and the tumor formation rate in a mouse skin tumorigenicity test (Mumford et al. ). It was reported that the tumor formation rate for the control group (1.47 µg/100 m 3 ), wood smoke group (43.05 µg/100 m 3 ), and coal smoke group (506.44 µg/100 m 3 ) were 24.6%, 55.4% and 93.3% in mice and 0.9%, 6.4% and 68.0% in rats, respectively (He et al. ). In addition, indoor air samples of ten communes in Xuan Wei showed no dose–response relation of PAHs and lung cancer mortality rates, and there was no differential expression rate for BaP-related DNA adducts between women who used smoky coal entirely and women who only used wood (Chen et al. ; Mumford et al. ). This indicates that the roles of PAHs are still a dilemma. The unclear dose–response relation between PAHs and Xuan Wei lung cancer mortality after years of research in epidemiological and bimolecular levels indicated the PAHs could play a synergistic role in carcinogenesis rather than being a primary carcinogen.
Later, it was shown that the subfraction of compounds containing alkylated three- and four-ring PAHs was found to contribute the highest level of mutagenicity in the PAH fraction (Chuang et al. ). This hypothesis of alkylated PAHs being the major mutagens was supported when comparable levels of methylated PAHs in urine samples collected from the Xuan Wei population were identified: the alkylated PAH levels were 4.8-fold higher than that of the parent PAHs (Mumford et al. ). The high levels of methylated PAHs from bituminous coal combustion were linked to the high lung cancer rates in the two communes of Chengguan and Laibin in Xuan Wei (Mumford et al. ). Later, this team also analyzed the genome-wide gene expression in buccal epithelial cells from Xuan Wei residents and reported that significant gene alterations (IL8 and CASP3) were more correlated with carcinogenetic PAHs than with noncarcinogenic PAHs ( r = 0.41 vs r = 0.08) (Wang et al. ). Another research group also reported that the ratio of methyl-pyrene to pyrene in emission particles from Xuan Wei was twice as high as those of other places in China, such as Beijing and Shenyang (Zhou et al. ). Moreover, more species of methylated PAHs in smoky coal emissions than in wood emissions in Xuan Wei were detected by GC–MS: 35 in smoky coal emissions and 16 in wood emissions (Chen et al. ). Therefore, several components of PAHs in smoky coal combustion might be potential suspects for Xuan Wei lung cancer to some extent.
Free silica and fe-rich silicate
In 2005, Tian proposed that quartz, estimated by the elemental concentrations of silica (Si) and aluminum (Al), could play a critical role in elevated lung cancer risks in Xuan Wei based on fifteen different coal-burning experiments and particulate emission analysis (Tian ). They also reported that two coals associated with the highest lung cancer rates contained more free silica, organic sulfur and iron contents (Tian et al. ). Evidence indicated that this complex chemical mixture probably induced the high lung cancer mortality in Xuan Wei. Later, using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), various sizes of quartz crystals, ranging from 200 nm to over 20 µm, were identified in different bituminous coal types and the edges of quartz grains were replaced by chamosite (Tian et al. ). Furthermore, abundant quartz particles were also detected in the lung cancer tissues of Xuan Wei housewives who accepted surgeries because of lung cancer (Li et al. ).
These high concentrations of authigenic and fine grained quartz in Xuan Wei coal were found to be characteristic of a particular seam of deposition in this area—the End—Permian C1 coal, precisely adjacent to the Permian—Triassic Boundary (PTB) (Buher et al. ; Shao et al. ). The high concentrations of authigenic quartz in C1 coal were explained by the interaction of PTB groundwater with the Emeishan Basalts, an interaction that is highly localized in China (Large et al. ). There is also a clear spatial correspondence of high lung cancer rates to areas that produce and utilize C1 coal. It was thus hypothesized that the availability and usage of the C1 coal, with high concentrations of nano-sized quartz mixed with the organic matrix, are responsible for the lung cancer epidemic in Xuan Wei (Tian et al. ). This is consistent with another study that showed that the content of silicon dioxide (SiO 2 ) is nearly three times the average level of the whole country (Shao et al. ). Recently, it was also found that the fiber-like quartz in coal combustion might play a more essential role in lung cancer carcinogenesis in Xuan Wei (Downward et al. ). Although in 1996, crystalline silica, inhaled in the form of quartz or cristobalite from occupational sources, has been classed as a Group I human carcinogen, there are still disagreements among the IARC Working Group regarding this classification. Therefore, more studies on crystalline silica carcinogenesis are needed. The variability of the quartz hazard may also relate to the source, size, morphology, surface chemistry, and biopersistence. Considering all of these aspects, providing new evidence and insights on variable components in the coal combustion could play supporting roles for the carcinogenicity of quartz carcinogenesis (Large et al. ).
Then, through the analysis of compositional characteristics and mineralogy analyses of Xuan Wei smoky coals, the minerals mainly contained kaolinite, chamosite, quartz and calcite (Dai et al. ). The high concentrations of SiO 2 and Fe 2 O 3 in the combustion coal were supposed to be attributed to high proportions of quartz and Fe-rich chlorite (Dai et al. ). Indeed, Fe-rich chlorite was considered as the most reactive surfactant in producing free radicals among several iron mine ores associated with excess incidence of lung cancer in miners. In short, iron and quartz minerals from C1 coal combustion might act synergistically at the cellular level to cause oxidative stress, inflammation, and carcinogenesis. More toxicological and exposure models are still required to explore the interactive effects of Fe-chlorite and quartz in carcinogenesis for Xuan Wei lung cancer.
What are the mechanisms?
The aerometric, toxicological, and chemical research studies have shown that compared to the anthracite coal and wood, the combustions from Xuan Wei bituminous coal show multiple components with carcinogenicity, teratogenicity, and mutagenicity properties (Mumford et al. ; Lan et al. ). The Xuan Wei lung cancer epidemic could be explained by mechanisms of synergy among the suspected carcinogens in C1 coal combustion. Mechanistic studies, in vivo and in vitro, are needed to shed light on the contribution of C1 coal to the high lung cancer morbidity and mortality of Xuan Wei, China. Knowing more about the mechanisms for how coal combustion induces tumor formation, namely, mutagenesis, tumor promotion, and progression, could help to provide new interventions for the local people who are exposed to coal combustion indoor air pollution.
Driver mutation
Nano-sized particles in coal combustion could bind multiple chemicals and metals that induce gene mutations (Dwivedi et al. ). Granville et al. reported that, in the standard Salmonella plate-incorporation assay, TP53 and KRAS were mutated when exposed to Xuan Wei smoky coal extract (Granville et al. ). In another multiplexed assay study, among the lung tumor tissues from nonsmoking female patients in Xuan Wei who accepted surgeries, researchers identified that the EGFR gene and KRAS gene mutation rates were 35% and 15%, respectively (Hosgood et al. ). In addition, abnormal expression of some lung-specific genes also provided some possible mechanisms in Xuan Wei lung cancer carcinogenesis. The SOX4 gene had high expression in the XWLC-05 cell line (a specific cell line that was originally from the lung cancer tissues of a Xuan Wei female lung cancer patient). When this gene was knocked out in vivo and in vitro, it induced decrements for cell proliferation, invasion and migration (Zhou et al. ). Recently, another team also screened the candidate driver genes among eight paired Xuan Wei lung cancer and noncancerous lung tissues. From their analysis of genome-wide DNA copy number alterations (CNAs) and differentially expressed genes (DEGs), CREB3L4, TRIP13, and CCNE2 were shown to possibly relate to Xuan Wei lung cancer (Zhang et al. ). In our opinion, the genotoxicity induced by indoor smoky coal combustion needs to be balanced against DNA repair mechanisms. The length of fibers and interactions with metals should also be considered because they might interfere with chromosome migrations and induce aberrations and aneuploidy.
Oxidative damage and inflammation
The oxidative stress-mediated biomolecular damage and inflammation in tumorigenesis are other essential pathways for Xuan Wei lung cancer carcinogenesis because excess oxygen free radicals could be induced by coal combustion products. High levels of oxidative stress stimulate the biomolecule damage, cell signaling pathway impairment and oncogenic hit incensement (Sesti et al. ). As the smoke and fly ash from the Xuan Wei smoky coal contains sulfates, silicates, and carbon- and nitrogen-containing compounds, as well as nickel, iron, aluminum and other substances (Seow et al. ), the coal combustion could be the main exogenous source of oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species (ROS) and inflammatory cytokine activity. The mitochondrial DNA copy number (mtDNAcn), a marker of oxidative stress, was found to be a potential mediator of indoor air pollution toxicity in Xuan Wei (Wong et al. ). Bonner et al. reported that the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number increased among the morning sputum samples from Xuan Wei local people (Bonner et al. ). In addition, metals in the coal fly ash can also induce oxidative stress depending on the concentration and time in the body (Hosgood et al. ; Valko et al. ). The biomarkers of oxidative stress, including ROS, glutathione (GSH), reactive nitrogen species (RNS) free radicals, malondialdehyde (MDA), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), displayed a dose–response relationship. Large numbers of ROS activated nuclear factors kappa B (NF-κB) and nuclear factor erythroid 2–related factor 2 (Nrf2), which belong to the carcinogenic genes and regulate inflammation and induce the antioxidant response (Straif and Samet ; Qian and Huang ). If the Fe-chlorite and quartz synergistically play an essential role in the oxidative stress-mediated biomolecular damage and inflammation in the tumorigenesis pathway, we hypothesize that coating the particle with chelator salts might prevent MIP-2 upregulation and NF-κB activation induced by coal combustion exposure.
Genetic susceptibility
Genetic susceptibility is also part of the research expanded efforts to help further the understanding of the etiology of the high lung cancer in Xuan Wei. With the development of genome-wide association studies (GWAS), it could help provide some clues to the predicted genetic contribution to the disease (Hu et al. ). Lan et al. conducted a GWAS of lung cancer among nonsmoking women in Asia and identified 5 suspected loci from chromosomes 3q28, 5p15.3, 6q22.2, 6p21.32, 10q25.2, and 17q24.3 in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II region gene (Hsiung et al. ). Then, they explored the interaction between coal usage, GWAS-identified SNPs, and lung cancer risk and found that among these five suspected loci, HLA Class II rs2395185 and TP63 rs4488809(rs4600802) showed significant interactions with the household coal combustion ( p = 0.02; p = 0.04) (Hosgood et al. ). Furthermore, the same team used a meta-analysis to identify three additional loci that were significantly related to lung cancer in never-smoking women in Asia (rs7741164 at 6p21.1; rs72658409 at 9p21.3; rs11610143 at 12q13.13) (Wang et al. ). For comparison, the GWAS findings for lung cancer in Western populations indicated that the majority of the findings in nonsmoking Asian women are distinct (Seow et al. ). In addition, the specific genotypes or loci of the high-priority candidate genes for Xuan Wei lung cancer are under investigation. A strong association between smoky coal usage and the glutathione S-transferase M1 (GSTM1)-null genotype was reported (Lan et al. ). This study was also supported by a published meta-analysis: the GSTM1-null genotype could increase the lung cancer risk (OR = 1.31, 95% CI 0.95–1.79, p = 0.10). Thus, continuing study of the polymorphism could contribute to understanding the genetic variation among the Xuan Wei residents and lung cancer patients and help provide more information about the pathogenesis and carcinogenesis mechanisms for gene-environmental interaction diseases.
Epigenetic modulation
Epigenetic modulation involves heritable changes in gene expression without a change in the underlying DNA sequence (Sun et al. ). Among 13 downregulated and 2 upregulated miRNAs from Xuan Wei NSCLC samples, miR-144 was the most significant one with an 88.2% downregulated rate while the control group was 63% (Pan et al. ). The miRNA miR-144 was associated with Oncogene Zeb1 and could modulate TRAIL-induced apoptosis if targeting caspase-3 as well (Ovcharenko et al. ). Changes in miR-29 and miR-1 expression regulation were found to be another significant event, which was associated with lymphatic metastasis in XWLC-05 cells (Fan ; Song et al. ). Wei et al. also reported that more dysregulated lncRNAs in Xuan Wei patients from the smoky coal combustion areas displayed 62.9% upregulation of lncRNA CAR intergenic 10 (CAR10), which induced lung cancer cell proliferation and EGRF overexpression (Wei et al. ). A recent study showed that alteration of genome-wide CpG island DNA methylation in Xuan Wei lung cancer tissues could contribute to the development and progression of local lung cancer to some extent (Jiang et al. ). Therefore, epigenetic modulation could help us understand more about lung responses to Xuan Wei indoor coal combustion air pollution and the mechanisms of gene expression without DNA sequence modification.
Conclusion
Reviewing previous epidemiology and toxicology studies on carcinogens in Xuan Wei bituminous coal combustion, we provide some predictable causations for the primary cause of high lung cancer mortality. The carcinogen components in the combustion ash and smoke from the local smoky coal ranging from the PAHs to the quartz and relative integrations with other toxic inorganic matter have been addressed. Until now, the exact carcinogen(s) causing the high mortality of Xuan Wei lung cancer have not been clear. A deeper understanding of the etiology of lung cancer in this epidemic area would shed new light on more effective interventions in the future. To gain insights into the carcinogenic mechanisms and inform targeted intervention approaches, it is urgent to identify the exact chemical components that are responsible for the carcinogenicity of coal combustion. For further studies, paying more attention to analyzing the chemical properties of coal combustion by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Scanning electron microcopy (SEM) with energy dispersive X-ray analyzer (SEM–EDX) and other methods are needed. It is also necessary to explore the dose–response relationship between the suspected carcinogens and Xuan Wei lung cancer using in vivo and in vitro experiments. Moreover, the detailed interactions between crystalline silica and potential inorganic matter, such as clastic chamosite, iron and other substances, are likely promising research arenas to determine the underlying carcinogen(s) and carcinogenic mechanisms for Xuan Wei lung cancer.
Until now, more than half of the world’s population and large amounts of rural people who live in rural areas of China still depend on solid fuel burning in their daily life. The high mortality of lung cancer is still a serious health risk for those people. More promotion aimed at “healthy solid fuel” usage and sufficient prevention measures are urgently warranted. Subsequent intervention strategies on the particular toxic coal types require stronger causality proof from studies. Moreover, the data could also be strengthened by mechanistic studies on how iron, quartz, and other carcinogens in the complex mixture of C1 coal combustion act additively or synergistically in terms of different carcinogenesis pathways. Therefore, every effort to make coal burning and coal mining as safe as possible should also be taken. It is not practical to have a complete ban on the domestic usage of all coal types in the lung cancer epidemic areas. More realistic solutions could include stopping the usage of particularly hazardous coal types at least, or limiting them to be used by commercial and industrial coal-burning power plants. In summary, more in-depth studies on the carcinogens and relative mechanisms could promote efficient prevention policies being put into effect. For example, adding some chelating nutrition in people’s daily life or conducting some pretreatments to some types of smoky coal before local people use them are possible measures. All of these could spark actions for movement up the energy ladder from solid fuels to cleaner liquid/gaseous fuels, or other renewable energy sources, as well as public health promotion.