Introduction
Sulfur mustard (SM) with devastating toxicity was first used as a chemical warfare agent in World War I and then in the Iran–Iraq conflict which affected more than 100,000 military personnel and civilians. A more recent application of this chemical compound was reported in Syria in August 2015 (Hart et al. ; Mansour Razavi et al. ). Because of the long-term consequences of SM that are potentially transmitted to the next generation of affected people, it is considered a major military and civilian threat (Balali-Mood and Hefazi ). The skin, eyes, and respiratory system are the main targets of SM, but more than 80% of the compound can enter the blood circulation and also internal organs, consequently, causing neurologic and digestive disorders (Batal et al. ). The genotoxic effects of SM have been proposed as a major cause of massive cell death. Moreover, SM is considered as a human carcinogen compound by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) (Shelby ). It has been revealed that a majority of physical anomalies in children are associated with the exposure of their fathers to SM, meaning that SM might affect germline cells (Abolghasemi et al. ; Khan et al. ). Therefore, having an illustration of the toxic genome of victims can provide useful information about the possibility of transferring defective genes to the next generation and the associated phenotypic consequences. The laboratory techniques have been used for investigating SM-induced genotoxicity, and epigenome toxicity have been summarized in Table 1 . However, to date, no valid biomarker has been detected for SM-induced damages on DNA level using these techniques. This indicates the necessity for applying novel and specific tests for this purpose. In this review, SM-induced damages on DNA level including SM-induced DNA adducts, mutations, chromosomal structural variations, and epigenetic aberrations have been investigated, and for the first time, next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology is discussed as a potential detection method that can accurately, economically, and rapidly identify DNA adducts, structural variations, mutations, and epigenetic alterations with single-base resolution (Fig. 1 ). Thus, it is essential for scientists to know some of the key features that discriminate the available methods.
Table 1 Methods that were used for SM genome and epigenome toxicity Study aspect Method References Mutagenicity Ames Vijayan et al. ( ) acI mutant screening Boulware et al. ( ) Structural change Giemsa staining Savage and Breckon ( ) TUNEL, Western blot Steinritz et al. ( ) Radioactive labeling, X-irradiation, orcein staining Scott et al. ( , ) Formation of adducts UV/Vis spectroscopy, gel electrophoreses Jafari et al. ( ) GC-Mass Ludlum et al. ( ) HPLC Fidder et al. ( ) Neutral red uptake assay, XTT, comet assay Jost et al. ( ) QPCR and southern hybridization Shahin et al. ( ) Gel mobility shift assay Masta et al. ( ) DNA alkylation and quantitative purine derivatives assay Kircher and Brendel ( ) Ames test labeled of SM Gilbert et al. ( ) Venitt ( ) HPLC–MS/MS Batal et al. ( ) Comet assay Stetina et al. ( ) DNA repair pathways Western blot Jowsey et al. ( ) Western blot immunofluorescence Jowsey et al. ( ) Western blotting comet assay, DNA adduct immunoassay Jowsey et al. ( ) Bacterial and cell survival, Host cell reactivation assay Matijasevic and Volkert ( ) Luciferase activity test Matijasevic et al. ( ) Radioactive labeling, X-irradiation, orcein staining Scott et al. ( , ) Labeled SM Venitt ( ) Epigenetic ELISA-based assay, immunofluorescence Simons et al. ( ) ELISA-based assay Steinritz et al. ( ) PCR array TUNEL Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling, XTT, 2,3-bis (2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-5-[(phenylamino) carbonyl]-2H-tetrazolium hydroxide, QPCR Quantitative polymerase chain reaction, HPLC high-performance liquid chromatography, GC-Mass gas chromatography, SM Sulfur Mustard
Fig. 1 Study of adducts, mutations, structural variations, and epigenetic aberrations using next-generation sequencing. WGS whole-genome sequencing, WES whole-exome sequencing, MCA–seq methylated CpG island amplification, HELP–seq HpaII tiny fragment enrichment by ligation-mediated PCR, MSCC methylation-sensitive cut counting, MeDIP–seq methylated DNA immunoprecipitation, MIRA–seq methylated CpG island recovery assay, ChIP-Seq chromatin immunoprecipitation, RRBS reduced representation of bisulphite sequencing, BSPP bisulphite padlock probes, BC–seq bisulphite conversion followed by capture and sequencing, WGBS whole-genome bisulphite sequencing
Overview of NGS
NGS is a technology with the ability to massively parallel sequence millions of DNAs. Second-generation (2G) and third-generation (3G) terms in sequencing technology are used to illustrate the development of sequencing technology from the first-generation ‘Sanger’ sequencing (Meldrum et al. ). Currently, 2G technologies are most commonly used. These technologies involve three main steps including library preparation, PCR amplification, and sequencing, while 3G technologies are PCR-free and cycle-free chemistry that provide single molecule and real-time sequencing (Ari and Arikan ; Meldrum et al. ). PCR amplification process in 2G technologies can be performed in two ways including emulsion PCR (emPCR) and bridge PCR (Heather and Chain ). In emPCR, DNA fragments attach to beads via adapter sequences, and then undergo a water-in-oil PCR amplification (Fig. 2 a). Roche/454 and Life Technologies are two companies which use this strategy for fragments amplification (Heather and Chain ; Morozova and Marra ) (Fig. 2 a). In bridge PCR which is performed by Illumina company, DNA fragments are attached to flow-cell surface coated with single-stranded oligonucleotides, the strand bends over to bind to the second oligonucleotides which form a bridge, and then, for PCR amplification, ends of each bridge are used to generate clusters of clonal populations (Heather and Chain ; Morozova and Marra ) (Fig. 2 b).
Fig. 2 Schematic of the second-generation sequencing amplifications. a Emulsion PCR, in which fragments are attached to beads-containing adaptors and amplified within water-in-oil drop, which result in generating clonal copies of template molecules. b Bridge amplification, in which end of single DNA fragment is attached to a solid flow-cell surface by an adapter, and then, the fragment bend over and hybridize to complementary adapters to generating a local cluster of identical fragment. In the end of the process, million clusters of template molecules are produced
Nucleotide detection in 3G sequencing is performed in two ways using zero-mode waveguide (ZMW) technology (Levene et al. ) or nanopore bilayer membrane (Haque et al. ). ZMWs are ~ 150,000 nanophotonic structures that contain a circular hole, a DNA polymerase, fluorophore-labeled nucleotides, template molecule, and sequencing primer that are attached to the bottom of each ZMW (Buermans and Den Dunnen ). During the sequencing, complementary DNA is synthesized from the template by DNA polymerase, primers, and fluorophore-labeled nucleotides. In the incorporation process into the ZMW, the base-specific fluorophore is emitted at a specific wavelength due to laser-mediated illumination and are recorded to interpretation (Fig. 3 a) (Gupta ). This technology has developed by Pacific Biosciences company and called it single molecule real time (SMRT) (Eid et al. ). Nanopore DNA sequencing involves the use of a very thin membrane through which DNA molecule is driven, and during the traverse, nucleotides lead to a temporary potential change between two compartments. The result of this change is used for nucleotide identification (Fig. 3 b) (Gupta ). ZS Genetics (Reis-Filho ) and Electron Optica (Goodwin et al. ) are two start-up companies which work on DNA sequencing by electron microscopy. In this study, each platform detail which has been broadly described elsewhere will not be discussed.
Fig. 3 Schematic of the third-generation DNA sequencing nucleotide detection. a Nucleotide detection in Pacific Biosciences sequencer performed using zero-mode waveguide (ZMW). During incorporation process, laser beams from the bottom of the ZMW are illuminated and the emission signals of the synthetized nucleotides are recorded. b Nanopore sequencing technology, when DNA passes through pore and nucleotides individually, is detected by changing ionic current caused by differences in electronic characteristics of nucleotide. These changes are graphically recorded and then interpreted to detect the nucleotides
Sulfur mustard-induced DNA adducts and NGS approaches
Sulfur mustard-induced DNA adducts
Owing to the existence of many reactive groups in DNA molecules, there are always potential targets for endogenous compounds such as reactive oxygen species (ROS), electrophiles, and metabolites as well as exogenous chemical compounds such as sulfur mustard (Gregus and Klaassen ; Shelby ). These endogenous or exogenous chemical compounds can affect the genome directly by interacting with nucleotides or indirectly by disturbing DNA replication and transcription processes (Masta et al. ; Merk and Speit ). Monoadducts, cross-links, and DNA strand break are multiple SM-induced DNA lesions (Fidder et al. ; Jowsey et al. ; Shukla and Mishra ). Monoadducts are the main causes of DNA alkylation lesion which is created mainly at the N7 position of guanine [N7-hydroxyethylthioethyl-guanine (HETE-N7Gua)] and less commonly at the N1 or N3 [N3-hydroxyethylthioethyl adenine (HETE-N3Ade)] positions of adenine (Fidder et al. ). It seems that DNA monoadducts are more probably associated with delayed genotoxicity effect of SM which, subsequently, can lead to accumulation of mutations in the cells (Jowsey et al. ). However, SM-induced cross-links result in the prevention of DNA replication (Matijasevic et al. ), and it is believed that unrepaired cross-links can lead to double-strand breaks (DSBs). Therefore, due to the devastation of the complementary sequence and destruction of the proper DNA template, DSBs are considered as the most adverse type of DNA damage (Shakarjian et al. ; Walker ). Another alkylation damage that occurs albeit rarely after exposure to SM emerges at the O6 of guanine (O6-ethylthioethylguanin). In this case, the lack of a proper repair system and the poor ability of O6-alkylguanine alkyltransferase to make repairs, this damage can have serious consequences (Ludlum et al. ; Yanagida et al. ). Evidence suggests that other mechanisms involved in DNA toxicity of SM are the formation of strong toxic reagent peroxynitrite (ONOO-) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Korkmaz et al. ; Laskin et al. ). ONOO and ROS can interact with DNA structure and cause oxidative stress which results in a reduction in antioxidant capacity and DNA repairing ability (Korkmaz et al. ; Wilson et al. ). In response to these deleterious effects that occur in DNA, cells recruit multiple repair pathways, such as base-excision repair (BER), nucleotide-excision repair (NER), homologous recombination (HR), and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) to repair the damaged DNA and stop deleterious biological consequences (Panahi et al. ); however, DNA repair system cannot always overcome damages and results in accumulation of genetic aberrations in the cells (Kehe and Szinicz ). Assessment of aforementioned DNA adducts provide determination of SM genotoxicity levels which can help peril identification, predicting the drug’s possible benefit/risk assessment, and it also contributes to controlling the cellular defense against SM (Shah ).
DNA adduct detection and NGS approaches
The high-throughput NGS that can be recruited for genome-wide maps of DNA adducts has opened a new window for studying DNA genotoxicity mechanisms. There are three strategies for studying DNA adducts based on NGS, and scientists have designed some models using these strategies (summarized in Table 2 ) (Sloan et al. ). The first strategy has developed based on the evaluation of DNA polymerase processivity that will stop at the nucleotide instantly adjoining to a damaged site and it allows identification of the exact DNA adduct position at the terminus of sequenced fragment (Fig. 4 a) (Sloan et al. ). For example, in “cisplatin-seq” model, cisplatin-induced DNA damages are genome-wide mapped at single-base resolution. In this model, first adaptors are ligated to the DNA fragments contain adducts, during first-strand DNA synthesis, DNA polymerase is stalled at cisplatin cross-linking sites, and then, second adaptors are ligated followed by sequencing (Hu et al. ). In this regard, Shu et al. ( ), used high mobility group B1 (HMGB1) protein to pull down cisplatin-modified DNA, because this protein is known to be able to bind strongly to sites of cisplatin adduct. The second strategy is based on DNA repair assay in which key proteins of repair [e.g., transcription factor II H (TFIIH) in nucleotide-excision repair (NER) pathway] are immunopurificated to discover excised oligonucleotide that are removed from the damaged strand, because these excised oligonucleotides remain bound to TFIIH (Fig. 4 b) (Sloan et al. ). The example model presented for this strategy is “tXR-seq” that is employed to detect cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) and BaP diol epoxide-deoxyguanosine (BPDE-dG) adducts. In “tXR-seq” model, the isolated bulky base adducts are ligated to adaptors, and after adduct-specific immunoprecipitation, oligonucleotide-containing adaptors are converted to double-strand DNA by TLS polymerase, followed by PCR amplification and sequencing (Li et al. ). The third strategy is based on inducing strand breaks with an endonuclease at damaged sites, and then, the resulting fragments are converted into sequencing libraries (Fig. 4 c). For example, in CPD-seq method, after the first adaptor ligation, treatment of DNA with apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease (APE1) and T4 endonuclease V (T4 endo V) is performed to produce 3′-hydroxyl ends; then, the second adaptors are ligated to these 3′-hydroxyl ends, followed by purification, amplification, and sequencing (Ding et al. ).
Table 2 Example of adduct studies using next-generation sequencing Strategy Methods DNA damages Comments References DNA polymerase processivity Cisplatin-Seq Cisplatin-induced damage HMGB1 were used that bind powerfully to sites of cisplatin-modified DNA Shu et al. ( ) Damage-Seq Cisplatin-induced damage Combination of this method with XR-seq provides detection cisplatin-induced damages that is uniformly distributed in the human genome Hu et al. ( ) HS-Damage-Seq CPDs, [(6–4)PPs] Required low concentration of DNA, which does not need to amplification of undamaged strands Hu et al. ( ) DNA repair assay XR-seq CPDs, [(6–4)PPs] TFIIH were immunoprecipitated Hu et al. ( ) Hu et al. ( ) (t)XR-seq CPDs and BPDE-dG adducts TFIIH were immunoprecipitated and TLS was used for optimization Li et al. ( ) Induces strand breaks CPD-seq CPDs T4 endonuclease and AP endonuclease were used as endonucleases Mao et al. ( ) Excision-seq Uracil variations and CPDs, [(6–4)PPs] UDG and T4 endonuclease IV were used as endonucleases Bryan et al. ( ) NMP-seq Map methyl methanesulfonate (MMS)-induced alkylation damage AAG and APE12 were used as endonucleases Mao et al. ( ) AP apurinic/apyrimidinic, UDG uracil DNA glycosylase, AAG alkyl adenine glycosylase, APE1 AP endonuclease, CPD cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers, BPDE-dG BaP diol epoxide-deoxyguanosine, [(6–4) PPs] 6-4-photoproducts
Fig. 4 Three strategies for DNA adduct detection: a based on assessment of DNA polymerase processivity that stops at the nucleotide instantly adjacent to an adduct site; b immunopurification of repair proteins that contain the damaged bases after repair; c inducing a strand break with an endonuclease to tracking of DNA damages
Using these methods can have some advantages; first, by designing specific model for specific adduct, the researcher will be able to gain insight into DNA adducts in whole-genome scale. Second, these methods directly provide adduct analyses in single-nucleotide resolution. Furthermore, a direct correlation between chemical compounds and DNA adducts and subsequent DNA alterations such as mutations, SVs, and epigenetic aberrations can be revealed. However, limitations related to read lengths and yield, decreasing DNA requirements, and stopping in vitro artifacts and cross-contamination have remained (Maslov et al. ; Sloan et al. ). Currently, these methods are limited to certain DNA adducts, such as UV irradiation DNA damages (Hu et al. ) or cisplatin adducts, etc. (Hu et al. ). To support the future evaluation regarding the genome-wide distributions of other forms of DNA adducts such as SM-induced adducts, further development about designing adduct-specific antibodies or excision repair proteins may be required.
Sulfur mustard mutagenicity effects and NGS approaches
Sulfur mustard mutagenicity effects
Genetic aberrations, which include point mutations, deletions, and insertions, can occur in the form of hereditary germline mutations and/or induced somatic mutations. Contrary to germline mutations that can be passed on through inheritance, somatic mutations caused by environmental agents and can be acquired between the cells of the body (Ning et al. ). SM causes changes in DNA by attacking nitrogenous groups of DNA through building a single alkylation point. For explaining the molecular mechanisms of SM mutagenesis, it has been assumed that the alkylation of guanine at the N-7 position results in the depurination of alkylated guanine; thus, in the DNA replication process, depurinated DNA may lead to CG-based deletion (Lawley ). The formation of O6–(2–ethylthioethyl) guanine is another mechanism proposed for the mutagenic effects of SM which is poorly repaired by its repairing-responsible enzyme O6-alkylguanine alkyltransferase (Ludlum et al. ). The available data demonstrated the potential of SM to induce mutations in bacteria, fungi, Drosophila, mice (Auerbach ), and in Zea mays (Gibson et al. ). Moreover, using Ames Salmonella/microsome mutagenicity assay, tester strains TA102 and TA97 showed point mutations and frameshift mutations, respectively; however, neither TA98 nor TAIO0 strains showed any mutations (Steward et al. ; Stewart ). Except for cancer studies, there are no indications regarding the spectrum of sulfur mustard mutations and related clinical outcomes in patients. The available evidence demonstrated that SM is capable of inducing mutations in cancer-related genes (Hosseini-khalili et al. ; Takeshima et al. ). SM induces point mutations in tumor suppressors and oncogenes, especially in p53 or KRAS genes which are well known for gene–environment interactions genes (Hosseini-khalili et al. ). As was detected in Japanese mustard gas factory employees who had been exposed to SM, the transition of G to A in p53 gene is a common mutation which results in inactivation of tumor suppressor genes and increases susceptibility to skin and lung cancers (Takeshima et al. ). Hosseini-khalili et al. and Takeshima et al. have demonstrated the existence of double and triple mutations in p53 gene caused by SM (Hosseini-khalili et al. ; Takeshima et al. ). Moreover, SM can induce mutations in genes involved in DNA repair. Mutation in DNA repair genes may increase DNA damage level or catalyze mutation induction procedure (Behravan et al. ). Putting all these together, it can be expected that lots of mutation caused by SM have remained to be found and further exploration is required.
Mutation detection and NGS approaches
The ability of NGS to sequence large numbers of genes provides an opportunity to detect human genetic aberrations. The previous information about SM-induced mutations was limited and the traditional methods such as PCR-based methods, electrophoresis-based methods, and blotting methods are limited to a small number of loci, and also gene-by-gene detection of mutations using these methods is impossible (Mahdieh and Rabbani ). However, NGS can simply identify most of the genetic variations of the SM victims, where profiling of known and novel single-nucleotide variations (SNV) is performed in a single assay (Koboldt et al. ). Despite the potential of NGS which can bring us closer to the precise detection of SM-induced mutations, there is no report about the using of this technology in the victims or research projects. Next-generation sequencing has the ability to sequence ranging from targeted part of the genome which provides information about interesting genes to whole-exome sequencing (WES) which sequences encoding exons to whole-genome sequencing (WGS) (Davey et al. ). WGS is a tool that provides comprehensive information about gene variations in whole-genome scale (Dewey et al. ). Although this option of NGS enables complete variation discovery, it is currently more expensive than WES or targeted sequencing. In addition, data analysis of WGS is problematical because of the amount of data and unavoidable errors in determining the impact of particular variation on health (Dewey et al. ). Exome sequencing is mainly applicable to evaluate SM victim’s genome that contains potential variations within the coding region. WES utilizes sequence capture method to selectively capture coding regions of the genome followed by target fragment enrichment and sequencing (Koboldt et al. ). This method provides genetic information only from exon regions in addition to 200 bp of both upstream and downstream of the same exon. This can not only increase the quality of data but also reduce the cost of research compared to WGS (Choi et al. ). An alternative option in mutation detection in SM victims is to use gene panels which can restrict screening to selected genes or genetic regions (Metzker ).Targeted sequencing produces much higher coverage of targeted genomic regions with low cost and it is time-saving. However, this can be achieved after WGS or WES to be provide a multi-gene targeted panel of mutations (Xuan et al. ). The advances in NGS also opened up new opportunities for mutation detection with great sensitivity called “High-Fidelity DNA Sequencing”. High-Fidelity DNA Sequencing has been guided by a single principle—redundant sequencing that allows DNA fragments of samples can be tracked easily and also it provides multiple readings from each of those fragments. The sensitivity power of these methods is originated from unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) or barcodes that consist of a random nucleotide between 8 and 14 bp in length. UMIs can be attached to sample fragments by either PCR amplification or adapter ligation (Sloan et al. ).
Mutagenicity evaluation of chemical compounds (these compounds generate adduct that is structurally similar to those adducts induced by SM) have been performed using NGS. Cisplatin which causes monoadducts and interstrand cross-link (Lemaire et al. ) has been studied in C. elegans by WGS, and the results showed a high percentage of G:C>T:A variation at CpG sites (Meier et al. ). In addition, in another study that used single-cell clone sequencing to explore cisplatin mutagenesis in DT40 lymphoblastoma cell line, C:G>A:T mutation was the most common mutation in this cell line (Szikriszt et al. ). Cyclophosphamide which belongs to nitrogen mustard family of anticancer drugs is considered as the main genotoxic substance which causes monofunctional adducts at guanine-N7 and interstrand N7-N7 cross-links (Povirk and Shuker ; Wheeler and Alexander ); single-cell clone sequencing revealed that A:T>T:A and G:C>A:T are the most common base pair substitutions (Szikriszt et al. ).
Sulfur mustard-induced structural variation and NGS approaches
Sulfur mustard-induced structural variation
Variation in a DNA region larger than 1 kilobase (kb) is called structural DNA variation; it happens in cells within the mitosis step and includes -umber variations (CNVs), multiple classes of translocations, inversions, and insertions/deletions (indels). Smith et al. have reported DNA structural changes in epithelial cell cultured after exposure to SM. They observed that if SM is used at low concentrations, it could block the G2-M phase, and if it is used in the equivalent of a vesicating concentration, it could block the G1-S phase in human epithelial cell cultures (Emison and Smith ). Shakil et al. ( ) observed that, after exposure of factory workers of Ohkunojima to mustard gas, they had a higher incidence of mutations, chromosomal aberrations, sister chromatid exchanges, and loss of chromosome Y. A study performed on the peripheral lymphocytes of fishermen who were exposed to SM shells indicated the existence of a sister chromatin exchange in the cells (Wulf et al. ). Cytogenetic analyses of Iranian victims showed a correlation between exposure to SM and increase of chromosomal aberrations (Ghanei and Vosoghi ). In another cytogenetic study performed by Hassan et al., 22 out of 26 patients in the severe group were either hypo- or hyperdiploid in their peripheral blood (Zahir et al. ). Multiple studies have proposed various probable mechanisms for the induction of structural variation by SM (Bennett et al. ; Fox and Scott ; Liu-Lee et al. ). For example, Liu-Lee et al. ( ) suggested that cross-links are more effective than monoadducts in inducing structural variations, probably because the DNA repair system can respond better-to-small proportions of lesions such as monoadducts than cross-links. Bennett et al. ( ) have demonstrated that the mustard gas analog 2-CEES causes centrosome amplification in mouse and human cells, consequently, resulting in an increased-aneuploidy. As mentioned by Fox and Scott, three factors determine the frequency of chromosomal abnormalities in mustard-treated cells. These factors include the primary amount of alkylation in the cells, the amount of damages repaired before the DNA synthesis process, and the persistence of DNA lesions which probably leads to replication mistakes in the form of SVs (Fox and Scott ).
Structural variation detection and NGS approaches
In the past few years, chromosome banding methods, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), and various PCR-based methods were common for detecting structural variations (Mahdieh and Rabbani ). These methods are unable to detect SVs at the nucleotide level which makes it challenging to investigate the certain pathological burden. With the appearance of NGS technologies, the detection of structural variants was revolutionized and these techniques had an enormous effect on the field of cytogenetics. Ongoing progress and the accuracy of NGS have resulted in an increased acceptance of sequence-based structural and numerical change detection (Ordulu et al. ). Using NGS for detecting SVs in SM victims offers two advantages. First, NGS provides absolute detection of rearrangements in single-nucleotide resolution in genome-wide scale and in cost-effective manner. Second, NGS has the ability to detect various types of SVs which may have previously remained unknown in SM victims.
There are four approaches for detecting SVs (summarized in Table 3 ). The efficiency of each method depends on the type of sequencing data available (Alkan et al. ). The first method is read depth, which is one of the conventional methods that uses total depth of coverage from NGS data for identifying deletions and duplications. In other words, this method searches for excessive read depth or low read depth in a genomic region to indicate gain or loss of DNA, respectively (Le Scouarnec and Gribble ). Read depth has been calculated in several ways, such as fragments or reads counting, mapped to a specific genomic region and computing total of per-base coverage within a region (Wang ). This method is suitable for detecting small deletions and duplications at better resolution; however, it accompanies with some challenges such as coverage biases, repetitive genomic region, nucleotide composition, and low or high GC which may affect hybridization, amplification, and sequencing (Mason-Suares et al. ).
Table 3 Advantages and disadvantages of next-generation sequencing methods for detecting structural variations SVs classes Read depth Paired-end Split-read Assembly Deletion Detectable Detectable Detectable Detectable Insertion – Detectable Detectable Detectable Inversion – Detectable Detectable Detectable Tandem duplication Detectable Detectable Detectable Detectable Interspersed duplication Detectable Detectable Detectable Detectable Advantages Applicable in targeted NGS panel data or WES Applicable for all SVs classes Applicable for all SVs classes Applicable for all SVs classes Provide 3 kb resolution Precise breakpoints for the identified SV Accurate and rapid Disadvantages Applicable just for deletions and duplication Will not detect the precise breakpoints Errors may occur against duplication Length of the reads and data is shorter than 1 kb which will affect the accuracy and precision Can be affected by coverage biases, repetitive genomic region, nucleotide composition, and low or high GC Small events can be ignored Repeats regions’ alignment errors may lead to false positives results Resolution affected by library prep size Segmental duplications, or other repetitive elements are problematic to align References Mason-Suares et al. ( ) Korbel et al. ( ), Mason-Suares et al. ( ) Mason-Suares et al. ( ), Zhang et al. ( ) Alkan et al. ( ) Schatz et al. ( )
The second method is paired-end sequencing that has been applied to genome-wide detection of SVs. This method generates millions of paired small reads from the ends of fragments of predefined size, and then, the sequenced ends of short reads are aligned against the reference genome. In this method, in the case of deletions detection when read pairs are mapped to the reference genome, it means there is no identifiable deletion. Detection of tandem duplications or insertions is performed when the reads are mapped closely and absent from the reference genome. Aberrant mapping orientation can detect inversions and tandem duplications, as well as, expected span distance of a sequence read pair. To detect novel insertions, comparison of only one read of the pairs with reference genome is suitable (Le Scouarnec and Gribble ). This approach is able to detect SVs at 3 kb resolution, and also, it does not need DNA library preparation which needs cloning. However, detection of SVs in regions with various copies of highly similar and longer than 3 kb repeats is challenging (Korbel et al. ).
The third method is split-read that recruits paired-end reads, in which one read maps uniquely to the genome, and the other that contains a breakpoint maps incompletely or leaves unmapped. Consequently, the depth of sequencing coverage mates to a specific point in the genome that provides evidence of SVs. This method is able to detect all classes of SVs as well as mobile-element insertions (MEIs) (Alkan et al. ; Mason-Suares et al. ). Due to the capability of split-read approaches to precisely map each side of the breakpoints, read lengths has the potential to increase. This leads to the precise detection of SVs (Mason-Suares et al. ). Application of split-read method has some limitations; for example, determining the absolute copy number for CNVs is problematic when several nucleotides are deleted or inserted at the breakpoints, also false-positive results are obtained when alignments error occurs (Alkan et al. ; Mason-Suares et al. ).
The last method is assembly in which after disassembling the long pieces of DNA into small fragments, the small fragments are read and the primary DNA are recovered by merging the data on several short fragments. In other words, it aims at reconstructed longer sequence (contigs) by short sequence reads, then eventually the contigs are compared to a reference genome to identify SVs (Alkan et al. ; Mason-Suares et al. ). Assembly approach is a powerful and rapid method that provides detection of all the forms of structural variation. Similar to other SV detection methods, because of the dependence on short reads, repetitive regions are problematic and so incorrectly or partly assembling of such regions to reference genome may result in imprecise detection of SV. It seems that assembling heterozygous diploid genomes adds more complexity to understanding complete human SV (Alkan et al. ; Mason-Suares et al. ).
Currently, all approaches can be recruited for WGS data, whereas the only approach is used for targeted NGS panel or WES data are read-depth method which is applicable for detecting small indels with a size of < 50 bp in a targeted exon between 200 and 300 bp (Kadalayil et al. ; Mason-Suares et al. ). In general, split-read, read-pair, and assembly are approaches that we can use to discover all forms of SVs; however, each method depending on variations type and data quality of the sequence reads can have its own problems. The read-depth method can be used to discover losses and duplications and is not able to differentiate between interspersed and tandem duplications (Alkan et al. ). In addition, because both paired-end and split-read methods depend on capturing breakpoints, they are not implemented well for the detection of CNV from sequencing data obtained from exome or targeted method (Abel and Duncavage ).
Epigenetic effects of sulfur mustard and NGS approaches
Epigenetic effects of sulfur mustard
Epigenetics is the study of temporal changes in gene activity without altering the primary DNA nucleotide sequence (Dupont et al. ). DNA methylation and histone modifications are the main parts of the epigenetic control mechanisms. The broadest epigenetic studies are based on cytosine methylation, in which methyl is added at the carbon 5 position of cytosine by DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) enzymes. Methylation of cytosine in CpG islands in the promoter regions has a significant role in transcriptional repression (Dupont et al. ). Modifications of histone play fundamental roles in the regulation of chromatin and DNA expression. These modifications include acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and sumoylation that mediate histones function. Acetylation and deacetylation of histones are the most common histone modifications that are controlled by two classes of enzymes called histone acetyl transferase (HAT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) (Peterson and Laniel ).
Several studies have proposed that inflammation, most cancers, cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases (e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), asthma, and chronic bronchitis are commonly related to SM exposure and are linked to epigenetic pathways (Dugac et al. ; Fraineau et al. ; Ghabili et al. ; Ives et al. ; Lewis et al. ; Matouk and Marsden ; Razavi et al. ; Rowell et al. ). However, there are a few studies directly linking epigenetic aberrations with exposure to SM. In this regard, based on preliminary results, Korkmaz et al. ( , ) have proposed that delayed deleterious effects of SM such as lung cancer may arise from epigenetic perturbations. An in vitro study conducted by Simons et al., the early endothelial cells (EEC) were used and the DNA methylation and acetylation of H3-K27, H4-K8, and H3-K9 histones, as well as, di-methylation of H3-K36, H3-K9, and H3-K27 histones 24 h after SM exposure were assessed. The obtained results were compared with the data of an in vivo skin samples exposed to SM for almost one year. They observed that SM significantly elevated DNA methylation in the late-cell passages as well as in the skin samples; however, a little variation in histone modifications levels was identified (Simons et al. ). Steinritz et al. ( ) observed that SM could significantly cause variation in epigenetic status 24 h after SM exposure, also low dose or high dose of SM exposure influenced this variation. Interestingly, the 0.5 and 1.0 µM of SM led to more changes than 23.5 and 50 µM doses. Mustard derivatives can suppress anti-inflammatory proteins and antioxidants by increasing HDAC levels in lung tissue (Korkmaz et al. ). Imani et al. ( ) mentioned that MAPK and NFκB stimulated by SM resulted in dysregulation of HAT and HDAC. Despite accumulating evidence regarding SM caused epigenetic aberrations, further investigates are still necessary to completely clarify the exact mechanisms.
Epigenetic aberrations detection and NGS approaches
Epigenetic studies using NGS technologies have provided details on human diseases. The next-generation sequencing technologies have contributed significantly to new discoveries in epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation patterns and histone modifications (Meaburn and Schulz ). Main principles of DNA methylation analysis method based on NGS are enzyme digestion, affinity enrichment, and bisulfite conversions which are three different types of pretreatment followed by different steps and can lead to determining DNA methylation patterns and profiles, as shown in Fig. 5 (Laird ).
Fig. 5 Overall procedures of the epigenetic study using next-generation sequencing
Enzyme digestion performs based on sequence-specific restriction endonucleases. This method provides four approaches based on NGS including Methyl–seq, methylated CpG island amplification (MCA–seq), HpaII tiny fragment enrichment by ligation-mediated PCR (HELP–seq), and methylation-sensitive cut counting (MSCC). The most common restriction endonucleases are used in the enzyme digestion method include HpaII and MspI, both identify the same cleavage site (5′-CCGG-3′).
In Methyl–seq method, MspI enzyme digests at the region irrespective of methylation status, while HpaII enzyme digests only unmethylated site. After digestion, DNA fragments are ligated to adapters and then are recruited for size selection to prepare sequencing library. This library can generate millions of short sequence tags with the length of 25–35 bp, which cover 90,612 regions in 23 chromosomes of hg18. Reproducibility, sensitivity, easy performance, and low cost are the primary advantages of this method, while analysis on a specific subset of HpaII cleavage sites restricts the number of CpGs assayed (Brunner et al. ; Soto et al. ).
MCA–seq uses SmaI (methylation sensitive) and its isoschizomer XmaI (nonmethylation-sensitive), both of which recognize the same cleavage site 5′-CCCGGG-3′. In this method after digestion, 5′-CCCGGG-3′ sticky ends are left, and then, the adaptors ligate to them to be prepared for PCR amplification and sequencing. Although this method is relatively rapid in the determination of the methylation status, using this method has some disadvantages; first, this method surveys only a restricted number of CpG sites within a CpG island, second sensitiveness to incomplete digestion using SmaI enzyme can decrease MCA–seq efficiency (Toyota et al. ).
In HELP–seq method after digestion of DNA by MspI and HpaII restriction enzymes, amplification of the fragments is performed by ligation-mediated PCR labeled with two fluorochromes which are specific for MspI- and HpaII-digested products; then, they are directly sequenced. This method examines the methylation status in spite of CpG density. However, it is limited to HpaII/MspI restriction site (Marzese and Hoon ; Olkhov-Mitsel and Bapat ).
The last method of enzyme digestion is methylation-sensitive cut counting (MSCC) in which, after HpaII digestion and adaptor ligation, the fragments that contain the site for MmeI enzyme are digested, and the second adaptor is ligated and followed by PCR amplification and sequencing. Although this method is more accurate in a large number of samples and it is not influenced by local sequence, there are limitations in the diagnosis of the moderate methylation variations (Ball et al. ; Colaneri et al. ; Kurdyukov and Bullock ).
Methylated DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP–seq) and methylated CpG island recovery assay (MIRA–seq) are two affinity enrichment-based methods applied for detecting methylated CpG sites. In addition, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) followed by next-generation sequencing (ChIP–seq) is another affinity enrichment-based method which is used for histone modifications.
In MeDIP–seq method, after fragmentation of DNA by sonication or restricted enzymes, the fragmented DNA is heated to single strand and immunocaptured by the 5mC-specific antibody, and then, the DNA is purified for sequencing. This method can identify over to 70% of all CpG island at a resolution of 100 to 300 bp in the human genome. Moreover, it is more sensitive and more efficient in a high density of CpG regions. However, single-stranded DNA is required which may be difficult to achieve in high CpG content regions. In addition, enrichment efficiency is affected in regions with low CpG content (Olkhov-Mitsel and Bapat ; Soozangar et al. ).
In MIRA–seq, heterodimeric complex of glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-tagged MBD2b and histidine (HIS)-tagged MBD3L1 proteins bind to the methylated double-stranded DNA. The DNA is purified and ligated to the adaptors, and then, it is sequenced. Sensitivity, specificity, and not requiring single-strand DNA are the advantages of this method, but the medium resolution and inability to identify methylation at non-CpG sites are considered as the disadvantages of this method (Jung et al. ; Rauch and Pfeifer ).
ChIP-Seq is a powerful method considered as a gold standard to study genome-wide alterations in histones. In addition, this method can apply for other protein-DNA interactions such as transcription factors, replication-related proteins, and chromatin remodeling complex subunits. In this technique, cross-linked DNA–protein complexes are immunoprecipitated to DNA, using a specific antibody. Then, the DNA is purified followed by adaptor ligation, PCR amplification, and sequencing. This method can evaluate genome-wide-binding site of modifications at the nucleosome level. However, limitation to a specific antibody and lack of capability to discriminate between direct and indirect protein binding are remained to be solved (Park ).
The discovery of bisulphite-converted DNA is particularly well suited and it is widely used in next-generation sequencing platforms, but reduced sequence complexity is the main challenge in sequencing. Reduced representation of bisulphite sequencing (RRBs), bisulphite conversion followed by capture and sequencing (BC–seq), bisulphite padlock probes (BSPP), whole-genome bisulphite sequencing (WGBS) are four approaches for determining epigenetic profile based on NGS using bisulphite-converted DNA (Fouse et al. ; Laird ).
In the RRBs method, after digestion of DNA by MspI or BglII, methylated sequencing adapter is ligated followed by bisulfite conversion, and then, PCR amplification is performed to provide sequencing. This method provides information about the methylation status of 4–6 million CpG regions including CGIs, promoters, and enhancers at single-base resolution (Gerhauser et al. ; Marzese and Hoon ). In addition, this method has the advantage to evaluate methylation status at non-CpG cytosines. However, low coverage and being limited to restriction enzymes digestion sites are the disadvantages of this method in comparison to the other bisulphite conversion methods (Olkhov-Mitsel and Bapat ).
In BC-seq method, after bisulphite modifications and adaptor-mediated PCR amplification, array capture is performed to provide sequencing library. This method can determine methylation status in a single-base resolution independent of GC density for both CG sites as well as non-CG sites. However, determination of different methylation status needs several permutations of capture oligonucleotides. Moreover, altering capture efficiency of different methylation states results in measurement errors (Laird ; Masser et al. ).
In BSPP method, padlock probes are hybridized to bisulfite-modified DNA, circularized, and followed by PCR amplification and sequencing. Padlock probe nature is end-segment probes which are complementary to a target sequence and are ligated by a linker sequence. Amplifying tens of thousands of multiplexed probes in a single tube is one of the advantages of this method, Moreover, enrichment efficiency is increased through reuniting two tethered probes, but methylation state may influence capture efficiency (Laird ).
WGBS is considered as the gold standard approach in terms of whole-genome coverage and analyzing DNA methylation at single-base resolution. Moreover, this method has solved some problems of the previous methods. However, high cost and generating plenty of uninformative data are challenging which restrict the widespread application of this method. In this method, after DNA fragmentation, the end-repair step is performed to add an adenine to the 3′ end of each fragment. Then, methylated sequencing adapters are ligated and the DNA is purified for library preparation. In the library preparation step, DNA is treated with sodium bisulfite to PCR amplification and sequencing (Marzese and Hoon ; Soozangar et al. ).
All approaches have strengths and weaknesses; however, choosing the right method depends on the number of samples, DNA quality, and quantity as well as the eligible resolution and coverage and cost. In overall, in enzyme digestion and affinity enrichment methods, calculation of the short reads which are exclusively alignable to part of the genome is used to assess the frequency of different methylation regions, whereas, in bisulphite-based methods, DNA methylation and alignment information is extracted from the sequence itself. In terms of accuracy, bisulphite-based methods are accurate and reproducible, but partial bisulphite modification and PCR efficiency for methylated versus unmethylated forms of the same sequence can increase the percentage of measurement error.
Conclusion
In spite of the widespread medical countermeasures, more than 30,000 of the 100,000 Iranian victims are still suffering from the deleterious effects of sulfur mustard. In this regard, we made an effort to introduce NGS technologies to promise to bring a solution to detection of multiple effects caused by SM in DNA level. NGS has allowed detailed profiling of variations in DNA in rapid, cost-effective, and high-throughput manners. The use of NGS-based information would be helpful for answering critical questions concerning SM genome and epigenome toxicity. A better understanding of these aspects will provide crucial clues underlying association of specific damages with SM-induced biological effects that can help researchers to develop an effective target therapy to control acute and chronic damages caused by SM. In addition, NGS technology can discover a full range of SM-related DNA variations including adducts, mutations, SVs, and epigenetic aberrations. However, it should be noted that NGS in this area is still in its infancy to become routine and several studies are required to address the NGS-based predictive biomarkers in genome-wide scale and result in designing adduct-specific model as has been designed for cisplatin DNA damages (Cis-seq) or panels that provide rapid detection of mutations, SVs, and epigenetic aberrations.