Introduction
Cocaine (methylbenzoylecgonine), the major alkaloid of Erythroxylum coca plant (approximately 20–90% of the total alkaloidal content of a leaf), has a long history of human use and abuse as psychostimulant (Dinis-Oliveira et al. ; Dinis-Oliveira ). This plant is native from the Andes region of South America, particularly in areas with altitude between 500 and 1500 meters (Boghdadi and Henning ; Goldstein et al. ). Ancient cultures used coca leaves not only for ceremonies and religious reasons, but also for the local anesthetic properties of cocaine (Jay ). Nowadays, it is estimated that there are 17 million past-year users of cocaine worldwide, rendering cocaine one of the most commonly used illicit drugs; 17.5 million European adults (aged 15–64), or 5.2% of this age group, have experimented cocaine at some time in their lives (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime ). Among these are about 2.3 million young adults aged 15–34 (1.9% of this age group) who have used this psychoactive substance in the last year (European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ). Moreover, hundreds of billions of dollars are spent in the war on drugs each year. Although the number of cocaine abusers is decreasing or stabilizing in parts of Europe, multiple indicators, including wastewater-based epidemiology approach, trafficking and seizures, and price and purity data, suggest that the availability of cocaine may be once more increasing worldwide (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime ). Indeed, following a long-term decline, coca bush cultivation increased by 30% during the period 2013–2015, mainly as a result of increased cultivation in Colombia (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime ). Moreover, overdose cases involving cocaine increased markedly in the United States between 2012 and 2015. Much of these cases were linked to the use of cocaine in combination with opioids, such as heroin.
Cocaine is highly addictive, possessing a relative risk of 5 in a 1–5 scale (Katzung and Trevor ), and its use is associated with a variety of health complications, namely midline destruction (Mari et al. ; Seyer et al. ; Smith et al. ), poor dental health (Brewer et al. ; Dinis-Oliveira et al. ; Maloney ), pseudoscleradermatous triad and “crack hands” (Payne-James et al. ), necrosis and gangrene of extremities (Dhawan and Wang ), reticular purpura (Walsh et al. ; Brunt et al. ), intracerebral (Bruno et al. ; Konzen et al. ) and peripheral hemorrhages (Lingamfelter and Knight ), angioneurotic edema (Kinsey and Howell ), rhabdomyolysis (Ruttenber et al. ), infections, and “crack lung” (Kissner et al. ).
Despite all the accumulating knowledge on the deleterious effects induced by cocaine at different target organs, there is still the need to study the impact of the recreational use of this psychoactive substance in terms of its inherent genotoxicity potential. This type of toxicity can be described as the ability of a given agent to damage the cellular genome. Genotoxicity is thus considered a broad term that involves changes that occur at DNA sequence or chromosome level. In this context, the formation of mutations is the critical event that may lead to carcinogenesis. Common genotoxicity endpoints include the assessment of DNA damage and repair, gene mutations, chromosomal aberrations (CAs), micronuclei (MN), sister-chromatid exchanges (SCE), aneuploidy and polyploidy (Preston and Hoffmann ).
The genotoxicity of cocaine is an overlooked problem of utmost importance in a comprehensive assessment of the possible carcinogenic risks arising from cocaine exposure, an open question for many years (Li and Lin ). Indeed, regarding the genotoxicity potential, several reports have been published recently, addressing diverse aspects related to the genetic damage induced by cocaine. These studies along with previous reports on cocaine’s genotoxic burden gather a considerable amount of data of pertinent interest in terms of toxicology and public health. Nevertheless, to our knowledge, no comprehensive review has been published or is available in the literature. Accordingly, this article aims to fill this gap, reviewing in vitro and in vivo data as well as human studies on this illicit drug. Moreover, this review also intends to discuss the conflicting results published in the literature and to give some insights on the possible mode(s) of action (MoA) of cocaine as a potential genotoxic chemical. In fact, some putative mechanisms will be discussed, particularly the involvement of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the formation of formaldehyde upon metabolism, as well as the interaction with mitotic proteins and aneugenicity. In the case of cocaine smoking, additional effects can arise from the formation of potential genotoxic pyrolysis products.
The driving force for this review relies on the fact that a significant number of cocaine abusers are exposed to this psychoactive substance for many years. In this sense, it is reasonable that not only the traditional toxicological features of long-term use of cocaine should be assessed but also other toxicological outcomes, as it is the case of genotoxicity.
Methodology
An English exhaustive literature search was carried out to identify relevant articles. Different types of genotoxic effects of cocaine were systematically searched in PubMed (U.S. National Library of Medicine) without a limiting period. Furthermore, electronic copies of the full papers were obtained from the retrieved journal articles (original and reviews) as well as from books on cocaine, which were then further reviewed to find possible additional publications related to in vitro and in vivo animal data as well as to human studies on individuals exposed to cocaine.
Processing coca plant into cocaine and different forms of presentation
Cocaine is a bicyclic compound that has two ester moieties: one with benzoic acid and other with the amino alcohol (methylecgonine) that contains a tropine moiety. The hydrophobic region is represented by the benzene ring, and a hydrophilic region consists of the amine moiety (Fig. 1 ). Although, cocaine is found in all parts of the coca plant, the leaves show the highest concentrations (approximately 2% by weight) and plants in higher altitudes tend to have higher cocaine content than those at lower altitudes (Warner ).
Fig. 1 Chemical structures of cocaine (free base form) and cocaine hydrochloride (amine salt form)
There are different ways of using the leaves to extract cocaine. The leaves can be (1) rolled into cigarettes or cigars and smoked; (2) chewed with lime or ash, promoting the release of cocaine in saliva; and (3) can be infused with a liquid to form a tea. To extract cocaine from the plant, the harvested leaves are soaked with solvents, such as kerosene, until a thick pasty substance (i.e., “cocaine paste”) is isolated. This paste, which contains 40–80% of cocaine (i.e., cocaine base), is then treated with hydrochloric acid to form the water-soluble cocaine hydrochloride salt (or “cocaine powder”, “Crystal” or street coke) before being then exported from South America. The “cocaine paste” is, therefore, the middle step between the leaf and the powder cocaine and can only be smoked.
Cocaine is sold mainly on the streets in two forms (Table 1 ): the powder cocaine and “crack”. A third form (i.e., “free-basing” or “freebase”) is rarely used, due to the risk of burns from ignition of the remaining diethyl ether, which is extremely flammable. “Freebase” and “crack” share the same chemical form (i.e., the deprotonated cocaine) but have different physical characteristics and are prepared using different techniques.
Table 1 General characteristics of the three main forms of cocaine available for abuse. Adapted from Langman et al. ( ), Dinis-Oliveira et al. ( ) and Maisto et al. ( ) Powder Also known as “crystal” or “street coke” It is a white powder formed when cocaine paste is mixed with hydrochloride acid Chemically it is the hydrochloride salt of cocaine Can only undergo to intranasal administration (i.e., “snorting” or “sniffing”) since it is soluble in mucous membranes or dissolved in water and then injected Cannot be smoked (pulmonary route) since it has a high melting point and decomposes easily at temperatures above 198 °C The dose varies between 20 and 100 mg, but can be much higher in heavy users It is the most widely used and the purest form The purity may vary considerably and it is typically diluted (“cut” or adulterated) with agents, such as mannitol, lactose, sucrose, caffeine, ephedrine and levamisole “Crack” Also known as “pre-based” cocaine It is a yellow rock crystal and heat stable Formed when powder cocaine is heated with an alkaline solution such as sodium bicarbonate Can only be smoked (e.g., using pipes or other paraphernalia)—since it is volatile at 90 °C and has a melting point of 98 °C, it travels away from the flame and cools. The vapor then condenses, forming smoke, which is an aerosol composed of cocaine base droplets and associated pyrolysis products Produces a crackling/popping sound when it is heated It is cheaper and more widely used than powder, but less stable during storage It is the deprotonated alkaloid Free-basing or freebase To remove “cut” adulterants, the user purifies cocaine powder by mixing it with sodium bicarbonate or ammonia upon which a precipitate insoluble in the aqueous solution is formed Diethyl ether or other equivalent solvent is then used to extract the free form of the drug into the organic solvent, which is then evaporated to dryness The resulting product resembles powdered sugar It is the deprotonated cocaine as “crack” Can only be smoked as “crack”
Toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics of cocaine: brief overview
General aspects of the toxicokinetics of cocaine
A shift in the preferred route of cocaine administration from the intravenous (i.v.) and intranasal routes to the smoked (i.e., “crack”) route has occurred during the last decade. The reasons for this shift are not well understood but may include social and environmental factors, such as the ease and convenience of the smoking route and avoidance of needle-transmitted diseases (Dinis-Oliveira et al. ). Indeed, among regular consumers, a broad distinction can be made between more socially integrated abusers, who often sniff powder cocaine, and marginalized abusers, who inject cocaine or smoke “crack”, typically associated with opioids such as heroin (European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ).
After absorption, cocaine is rapidly cleared from blood by a combination of tissue uptake, metabolism and excretion. The metabolic pathway of cocaine is depicted in Fig. 2 . Briefly, cocaine is mainly metabolized by two distinct pathways in humans (Jufer et al. ; Kovacic ; Kolbrich et al. ): (1) it is rapidly detoxified by hydrolysis of the ester groups to the major metabolites benzoylecgonine (BE) and ecgonine methyl ester (EME). These are inactive metabolites and, therefore, do not block the reuptake of monoamines into presynaptic neurons; and to (2) minor metabolites such as norcocaine, p -hydroxycocaine, m -hydroxycocaine, p -hydroxybenzoylecgonine, and m -hydroxybenzoylecgonine. Norcocaine, the most prominent N -oxidative metabolite, is reported to be formed by two alternative routes (representing less than 10% of cocaine metabolism): direct N -demethylation by cytochrome P450 CYP3A4 (Hawks et al. ; Misra et al. ) and formation of cocaine N -oxide by flavin-containing monooxygenase, followed by cytochrome P450-mediated conversion to norcocaine and formaldehyde (Kloss et al. ; Wang and Bartlett ). Norcocaine may be then metabolized to N -hydroxynorcocaine, norcocaine nitroxide free radical, and finally, to the hepatotoxic norcocaine nitrosonium ion (Kovacic ). Each of these metabolites has been shown to produce hepatic necrosis in mice (Ndikum-Moffor et al. ), but the mechanism responsible for the hepatotoxicity observed remains largely unclear.
Fig. 2 Major and minor metabolic pathways of cocaine. CYP cytochrome P450, FMO flavin-containing monooxygenase, hCE human carboxylesterase, BuChE butyrylcholinesterase
The simultaneous administration of cocaine and ethanol is well-documented (Higgins et al. ; Stinson et al. ; Hasin et al. ) resulting in pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions (Graziani et al. ). First, ethanol inhibits the metabolism of cocaine to BE and EME, permitting that higher plasma concentrations of cocaine are maintained (Roberts et al. ; Dean et al. ). Moreover, by shunting cocaine metabolism through alternative oxidative pathways, it also increases norcocaine plasma concentrations (Farre et al. ). Second, combined administration of ethanol and cocaine results in the biosynthesis of cocaethylene (i.e., benzoylecgonine ethyl ester) by a transesterification catalyzed by human carboxylesterase (hCE) (McCance et al. ; Cami et al. ). Cocaethylene accounts for 0.7% of a cocaine dose in 24-h urine and although it is less active than cocaine for causing tachycardia and euphoria it possess higher plasma half-life (2.5–6 h) (Laizure et al. ; Goldstein et al. , ). Nevertheless, several other metabolites have been described in the last few years and metabolic processes involved in cocaine clearance have only been partially characterized (Dinis-Oliveira ).
The heating of cocaine base during “crack” smoking results in the formation of the pyrolysis product anhydroecgonine methyl ester (AEME; pyrolyzate methylecgonidine) (Jacob et al. ; Dinis-Oliveira et al. ). AEME may be produced in large amounts and is rapidly absorbed together with cocaine in the lungs (Nakahara and Ishigami ). The amount formed during pyrolysis depends on the pyrolytic conditions and composition of cocaine (Maurer et al. ). Approximately 50–80% of cocaine is converted to AEME and benzoic acid at temperatures between 255 and 440 °C (Martin et al. ). It was recently shown that AEME induces neurotoxicity since it impairs long-term spatial working memory and also induces higher protein oxidation and increased levels of antioxidant enzymes in the striatum (Gomes et al. ) and increased activity of caspase-3 in cultured hippocampal neurons (Garcia et al. ). Therefore, it has been suggested that the use of “crack” cocaine carries a higher risk of neurotoxicity than the use of cocaine powder (Garcia et al. ). Moreover, Fandiño et al. ( ) hypothesized that N -oxidative metabolism may also play a role in AEME biotransformation and its N -oxide may contribute to “crack” toxicity. The authors studied the oxidative metabolism of AEME in rat liver microsomes, and the metabolite anhydroecgonine methyl ester N -oxide (AEMENO), was identified. Authors also proved that AEMENO is present in body fluids from “crack” users.
General aspects of the toxicodynamics of cocaine
Cocaine is an indirect adrenomimetic since it blocks the mechanism of monoamine reuptake such as dopamine (DA), noradrenaline (NA) and serotonin (5-HT), potentiating the activity of these neurotransmitters in post-synaptic receptors (Reith et al. ; Dinis-Oliveira et al. , ). The increase of DA in certain brain areas, such as in the nucleus accumbens, is responsible for cocaine reward and potent additive effects (Golan et al. ). Some studies have described that cocaine may directly activate post-synaptic dopaminergic receptors (D1 and D2) and that the additive effect may also result from blockade of acetylcholine reuptake in ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens neurons (Williams and Adinoff ). Despite cocaine causes feelings of euphoria and pleasure, considered “positive” symptoms due to the intensification of monoaminergic transmission (Reith et al. ), on the other hand, prolonged blockade of reuptake caused by the chronic abuse, leads to the depletion of these monoamines (Menon et al. ). Reduction of monoaminergic transmission results in numerous psychiatric symptoms and disorders such as depression, anxiety, insomnia, anecdotal, impulsive, aggressive and withdrawal symptoms (Kramer et al. ).
At the peripheral level, cocaine also acts as a local anesthetic (especially in the upper respiratory tract) because of its ability to block the voltage-dependent sodium channels (and consequent influx) in neuronal cells, thus blocking the propagation of the action potential (Goldstein et al. ). Cocaine is different from other local anesthetics in regards to its cardiovascular effects. Indeed, blockade of NA reuptake results in vasoconstriction and hypertension, as well as cardiac arrhythmias. Cocaine also acts as a class I antiarrhythmic by blocking sodium and potassium channels. These peripheral effects do not appear to be involved in reward or addiction to cocaine (Katzung and Trevor ).
Developmental toxicity of cocaine
The teratogenic potential of cocaine has been recognized since the mid-1980s, according to in vivo animal experimental studies and human data. Cocaine can easily cross the placenta and a variety of congenital malformations have been reported in the offspring from mothers that consume cocaine during pregnancy. The teratogenic effects in humans described in the literature include exencephaly, microencephaly, limb reduction as well as renal, heart, gastrointestinal, nasal and ocular defects (Buehler et al. ; Bishop et al. ; Li and Lin ). Other developmental effects associated with maternal consumption of cocaine include placenta abruption, spontaneous abortion, premature rupture of membranes, abnormal labor, preterm delivery and poor fetal growth with decreased body weight and length (Buehler et al. ; Yu et al. ; Glauser and Queen ).
Revisiting the carcinogenic potential of cocaine
The carcinogenicity of cocaine was predicted in the early 1990s by Rosenkranz and Klopman ( ) using the CASE system, an artificial intelligence system developed for the identification of structural determinants of biological activities, being applied to identify putative carcinogens. The authors at that time alerted about the possible health consequences of long-standing exposure to cocaine, and especially the challenging issue of in utero exposure due to the increased risk of transplacental cancer induction in the offspring.
Relevant articles on the histopathological and molecular alterations caused by cocaine smoking in bronchial epithelial cells have been published afterwards. Barsky et al. ( ) suggested that cocaine smoking induces field cancerization effects on bronchial epithelium highlighting for the possible lung cancer risks in these drug abusers. The alterations found were somehow similar to those observed in tobacco smokers. In fact, they reported that smokers of cocaine alone displayed significant features such as basal cell hyperplasia, cell disorganization, nuclear variation, basement membrane thickening, and subepithelial inflammation. Statistical trends in terms of stratification, increased nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, and squamous cell metaplasia were also found when compared with non-smokers. These authors also reported the higher expression of Ki-67 and epidermal growth factor receptor that can be considered molecular markers associated with increased cancer risk.
The editorial from Mao and Oh ( ) also addressed this topic, mentioning previous published studies, and the authors conjectured that former cocaine smokers could be at a higher risk of cancer even after cessation of the drug consumption. As reviewed by Restrepo et al. ( ), computed tomography scan of a non-small cell lung cancer patient with a long-standing history of “crack” cocaine abuse evidenced carcinogenic effects on the bronchial epithelium. Additionally, it should be noted that intranasal cocaine administration has also been associated with tumors. In fact, a solitary fibrous tumor of nasal cavity was reported in a patient with a long-term history of chronic cocaine intranasal administration (Chauhan et al. ). In a different perspective, an association between parental preconceptional exposure to cocaine and Cannabis derivatives such as marijuana (1 year) and the risk for childhood rhabdomyosarcoma was reported (Grufferman et al. ). In this case–control study, a two- to fivefold cancer risk increase was reported. Nevertheless, a recent review (Shrestha et al. ) addressing various factors associated with this disease argued that the abovementioned retrospective study relied on the recall of exposures that occurred several years prior to the interview.
The association of parental exposure to different types of xenobiotics and ras mutations was studied in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Shu et al. ). The authors reported that both maternal and paternal exposures to mind-altering drugs, including not only Cannabis derivatives, lysergic acid diethylamide, but also cocaine, were associated with N-ras mutations, whereas K-ras mutations were only associated with maternal exposure. In addition, it was also suggested that the chronic intranasal cocaine administration may predispose to the development of pancreatic adenocarcinoma, albeit this chart review involved only a small series number of patients (Duarte et al. ). Nevertheless, the carcinogenic potential of cocaine can be considered still largely unknown and cocaine has not yet been listed or evaluated as far as we know by key institutions such as the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC).
Genotoxicity of cocaine: evidences from in vitro and in vivo studies
The genetic damage induced by cocaine has been reported in both in vitro and in vivo animal studies over the past two decades. There are some studies available regarding mammalian cell-based genotoxicity assays and several in vivo rodent reports focusing on the genotoxic effects of different forms of cocaine (Table 2 ). On the other hand, to the best of our knowledge, no studies published in international journals have addressed the mutagenic potential of cocaine in prokaryote systems (e.g., in the classical Ames test). An analog of cocaine named iometopane (also known as β-CIT) was, however, tested in this reverse mutation assay and found to be negative (Emond et al. ). In a different perspective, several studies using non-mammalian models, including aquatic organisms have been reported. Some of these recent studies were designed to address particular ecotoxicological issues raised by the use of cocaine, being this research topic considered of great importance.
Table 2 Overview of in vivo animal studies addressing the genotoxicity of cocaine Endpoint Type of exposure/animal model Tissue/cell analyzed Key findings References 8-OHdG “Crack” cocaine; i.p./rat (Wistar) Hepatocytes Positive: the immunoexpression of 8-OHdG was significantly higher in hepatocytes from rats treated with the higher doses when compared with respective controls Moretti et al. ( ) Comet assay Cocaine; i.p.; male mice (C57BL/6J) PB, liver, brain cells Positive: increased DNA damage in PB and brain cells at all doses and in liver cells at the highest doses Alvarenga et al. ( ) Comet assay Cocaine; i.p./male mice (C57BL/6J) PB, liver, brain cells Positive: increased DNA damage in all cell types and for the majority of doses in sleep-deprived mice Alvarenga et al. ( ) Comet assay Cocaine; i.p./female rat (Wistar) Brain cells Positive: increased DNA damage in cells from all brain areas under evaluation after acute exposure. Similar positive findings after repeated exposure, except for cells from the hypothalamus. Protective effect of female sexual hormones de Souza et al. ( ) Comet assay “Crack” cocaine; i.p./mice (C57BL/10) PB, liver, kidney and brain cells Positive: increased DNA damage (tail moment) in PB, brain and liver cells at high doses Negative: no significant differences were found in kidney cells of treated mice Yujra et al. ( ) Comet assay “Crack” cocaine; i.p./rat (Wistar) PB, liver and kidney cells Positive: increased DNA damage (tail moment) in PB cells at the two higher doses and in liver cells at the highest dose level Negative: no significant differences were found in kidney cells of treated rats Moretti et al. ( ) Cell cycle analysis Cocaine; i.p./mice (C57BL) Thymocytes Positive: the results suggest higher frequency of aneuploid cells with increased DNA content in cells from exposed group Wu et al. ( ) MN Cocaine; i.v. and i.p./male mice (Swiss) Bone marrow (PCE) Negative: the frequency of MN in PCE was similar in exposed and non-exposed control mice. The ratio of PCE/NCE was also unchanged Salvadori et al. ( ) MN “Crack” cocaine; i.p./mice (C57BL/10) Bone marrow (PCE) and liver cells Negative: the frequency of MN in PCE and in liver cells was similar in exposed and non-exposed control mice Yujra et al. ( ) MN “Crack” cocaine; i.p./rat (Wistar) Bone marrow (PCE) and liver cells Positive: the frequency of MN was significantly higher in PCE from rats treated with the highest dose when compared with the respective controls Negative: no significant results were observed the induction of MN in liver cells Moretti et al. ( ) 8-OHdG 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine, MN micronucleus, PB peripheral blood, PCE polychromatic erythrocytes, i.p. intraperitoneal, i.v. intravenous
In vitro genotoxicity of cocaine using mammalian cell-based assays
The most extensive work focusing on the in vitro genetic toxicology of cocaine in mammalian cells was published by Yu et al. ( ). In this report, Chinese hamster ovary K1 cells (CHO-K1) were exposed to cocaine hydrochloride at a wide range of concentrations from 0.1 up to 3.0 mg/mL, varying according to the endpoint in evaluation. V79 Chinese hamster cells were also used in some experiments. Cytotoxicity (clonogenic survival), CAs, MN, SCE and the induction of mutations in the hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (hgprt) gene were evaluated. The authors found a weak clastogenic effect of cocaine in the absence of metabolic activation (S9 incubation). Accordingly, only a slight increase in chromatid gaps and dicentrics was reported. Conversely, a significant increase in the frequency of chromosome aberrations was reported upon incubation with S9-mix. In these conditions, the pattern of the aberrations included a large number of chromatid-type aberrations for the higher concentrations tested, although some increases in the yields of dicentrics plus rings were also recorded. Cocaine also increased in a concentration-dependent manner the frequency of SCE/cell, being this increase (less than twofold) independent to S9 incubation. The authors also reported that the formation of MN, using the cytokinesis-block micronucleus (CBMN) assay, and induction of hgprt gene mutations was significant only upon metabolic activation. Overall, the authors reported positive genotoxicity findings for cocaine at high concentrations (0.4–0.8 mg/mL) and reinforced the claim that the metabolite(s) are indeed intimately implicated in the genotoxicity of cocaine. In this context, it was also emphasized that ROS may play an important role in cocaine cytotoxic and genotoxic effects not only because these reactive species can be formed during biotransformation but also because the authors provided data on the reduction of MN in the presence of the catalase and superoxide dismutase.
Other in vitro studies focusing on the morphology of the female meiotic spindle have suggested the potential for aneuploidy of cocaine hydrochloride at high concentrations. In fact, this abused drug was found to generate defective spindles with barrel shapes and asymmetric spindle halves with wavy or branched fibers as well as some cases of chromosome misalignment at 100 µg/mL in cultured mouse oocytes. At a concentration of 1 mg/mL cocaine blocked development at metaphase I phase (Sobel et al. ).
In addition, mouse oocytes matured in vitro in the presence of a continuous treatment with cocaine displayed specific modifications in spindle architecture and in the centrosome organization that may influence chromosome segregation during meiosis-1 and likely be involved in the embryotoxicity of cocaine as suggested by Combelles et al. ( ). Also, normal murine thymocytes exposed to cocaine at 5 µg/mL revealed the presence of aneuploid cells with increased DNA content. Moreover, apoptosis was also observed upon cocaine exposure being inversely correlated with the frequency of aneuploidy. These experiments were included in Wu et al. ( ) that also addressed the effects of in vivo exposure to cocaine.
In vivo genotoxicity of cocaine in rodents
The genotoxic damage caused by cocaine has also been evaluated in in vivo experiments with rodents. The main results from these reports are summarized in Table 2 , being apparent the existence of conflicting outcomes. In some cases, both positive and negative genotoxicity data were obtained for cocaine within the same study, varying according to the cell/organ target or endpoint analyzed. It is also worthwhile to mention that some of the significant effects are obtained after exposure to high doses of cocaine.
In the context of an in vivo acute administration, male Albino Swiss mice exposed to cocaine hydrochloride via intraperitoneal (i.p.) at 60 mg/kg exhibited liver damage features along with specific alterations in the respective isolated hepatocytes in terms of ploidy and apoptosis (Cascales et al. ). This study marked increases in tetraploid (4N) and octoploid (8N) cells, together with decreases in diploid (2N) cells, 7 days after the administration of cocaine when observed compared with the initial values. In addition, it was demonstrated the existence of increased DNA content in thymocytes from mice exposed via i.p. route to cocaine (Wu et al. ). These results, along with the abovementioned data on cultured thymocytes exposed in vitro to cocaine, led the authors to propose that cocaine causes genetic damage, namely aneuploidy, and consequently apoptosis (Wu et al. ).
One of the initial reports focusing on biomarkers of cytogenetic damage in rodents was carried out by Salvadori et al. ( ). The authors chose the classical mouse bone marrow micronucleus assay and evaluated the frequency of MN in polychromatic erythrocytes (PCE) of male Swiss mice exposed to cocaine (99% pure) via i.p. (doses up to 75 mg/kg) and i.v (doses up to 8 mg/kg) routes. The results concerning the two sampling periods (24 and 48 h) did not reveal any significant differences in terms of MN frequency between the cocaine-treated groups and the respective negative controls. Although these negative results were conclusive, it was also mentioned by the authors that statistical trends were found for the increases in terms of micronucleated PCEs for both routes and in the case of i.p. administration for both sampling times. In the same report, the hepatocarcinogenic potential of cocaine as a promotor was also assessed using an assay with Wistar rats initiated for carcinogenesis with diethylnitrosamine. The results suggested the absence of such promoting activity.
Conversely, positive in vivo genotoxicity results have been reported for both cocaine hydrochloride and “crack” cocaine using the comet assay in cells from different organs (Table 2 ). In fact, brain tissue from exposed mice and rats have been particularly studied, and presented higher genotoxicity rates associated with comet assay, suggesting the induction of DNA breaks upon cocaine administration. Alvarenga et al. ( ) showed that all the tested doses of cocaine upon single exposure via i.p. (1.75, 3.5 and 7.0 mg/kg) induced significant DNA damage (comet assay; tail moment) in peripheral blood and brain cells of male C57BL/6J mice. In what concerns liver cells, DNA damage was significant only for the two higher doses, being especially extensive for 7.0 mg/kg of cocaine. A further study using the same animal model and target cells was delineated to evaluate the role of paradoxical sleep deprivation on the genotoxicity of cocaine (Alvarenga et al. ). Under these conditions, cocaine was able to induce DNA damage (comet assay; tail moment) at almost all the doses tested in the three cell types, and in a dose–response manner, being considered a potent genotoxic agent when associated with sleep loss.
The alkaline comet assay was also used to evaluate the genotoxicity of cocaine in cells from different brain areas of female Wistar rats under two distinct hormonal conditions, i.e., after ovariectomy or sham surgery (de Souza et al. ). Acute exposure via i.p. to cocaine (15 mg/kg) increased the genotoxicity index of cells from all areas (i.e., cerebellum, hippocampus, hypothalamus, prefrontal cortex and striatum). This effect was also observed after repeated exposure to cocaine via i.p. (15 mg/kg, 8 days) in cells from all areas except from the hypothalamus. Interestingly, the authors reported that the levels of DNA damage in cocaine-exposed rats are dependent on the hormonal status, being lower in cycling rats when compared to the ovariectomized counterparts, suggesting a putative protective role of female sexual hormones.
The comet assay has also been used to assess DNA damage in different types of cell types from rodents treated with “crack” cocaine. In fact, C57BL/10 mice exposed via i.p. to this psychoactive substance (i.e., 4.5, 9 and 18 mg/kg) evidenced significant increases in DNA damage (tail moment) of blood, liver and brain cells at the higher dose, whereas no effects were found for kidney cells, at any dose level (Yujra et al. ). The justification for this negative genotoxic effect in kidney cells in particular is not known, although the authors suggested a differential sensitivity presented by the renal tissue. These results were then confirmed afterwards in Wistar rats (Moretti et al. ). Using the same dose levels of “crack” cocaine, the authors observed increases in terms of genetic damage in liver and peripheral blood cells, whereas no genotoxic effects were observed in renal cells. These authors also evaluated the formation of micronuclei in bone marrow cells and found significantly higher yield of MN in PCE from rats treated with the highest dose when compared with the respective controls. In contrast, no differences in this biomarker were observed for liver cells.
Non-mammalian studies on cocaine: genotoxic impact in the environment?
Recent research articles have addressed the genotoxic impact of cocaine in a complementary perspective quite relevant concerning its effects in an environmental toxicology context through the constant discharge of wastewater. In fact, cocaine can be considered an environmental contaminant and, therefore, being used as a tracer to illicit drugs in the waters.
Cocaine and its metabolites, especially BE and EME, can be found both in sewage waters and in natural surface waters worldwide, being quite significant the amount of cocaine residue in some European rivers (Binelli et al. ). This alternative approach, called wastewater-based epidemiology, has been developed and successfully applied to obtain objective data on the consumption illicit drugs (Rodriguez-Alvarez et al. ; Rodayan et al. ). Indeed, although the levels of illicit drugs in wastewater effluents are lower than in raw influent, these are only partially removed by conventional treatment processes such as activated sludge or trickling filters and analytical methods may fail to detect them due to inadequate sampling and/or analysis protocols, or through conversion to transformation products (Yadav et al. ). Cocaine concentrations were reported in both untreated influent and treated effluent wastewater ranging from 0.7 to 4700 and 0.2–530 ng/L, respectively, with its main metabolite, BE, ranging from 5 to 7500 and 0.8–1500 ng/L in the influent and effluent, respectively (Yadav et al. ). Interestingly, the concentration of other cocaine metabolites such as norcocaine, cocaethylene, norbenzoylecgonine were quite variable in different parts of the world, with the higher concentrations recorded in European countries relative to other regions (Yadav et al. ). Based on the wastewater-based epidemiology approach, Maida et al. ( ) estimated a mean cocaine use in Palermo of 0.19 g/day/1000 people, corresponding to 1.90 doses/1000 people. These reports also highlight the fact that cocaine should be regarded as an air contaminant ubiquitous in most of the major cities worldwide.
The genotoxic effects of cocaine can be observed in different non-mammalian models, including aquatic invertebrates and vertebrates. Previously, using an assay for computerized scoring of DNA content, it was shown that cocaine hydrochloride and cocaine freebase can cause mitogenic effects in the protozoan model Tetrahymena pyriformis (Stefanidou et al. ). The DNA content correlated closely with the number of chromosomes being well known that mitogenic stimuli can be deleterious for the cell. In this case, the increase of DNA content was faster and more potent for cocaine freebase when compared with cocaine hydrochloride (Stefanidou et al. ).
More recently, some reports focusing on the genetic damage induced by cocaine in zebra mussels ( Dreissena polymorpha ) (Binelli et al. , ; Parolini et al. ); marine mussels ( Perna perna ) (Maranho et al. ) and zebrafish embryo ( Danio rerio ) (Parolini et al. ) have been published. The effect of cocaine in Zebra mussel hemocytes was first studied by Binelli et al. ( ) using the comet assay and the MN assay. These assays provide complementary information in terms of the genetic damage observed in a non-target organism, the mussel model. The authors also evaluated other endpoints for cytotoxicity and lysosomal membrane stability. Overall it was found that DNA fragmentation as measured by the comet assay was slightly increased upon a short period of cocaine exposure, although a significant time/effect correlation was found. Conversely, more evident effects were found in terms of MN frequency, reflecting clastogenic and/or aneugenic effects of cocaine and in terms of apoptotic cell frequency. The authors justify these differential effects with the capability of Zebra mussels to repair low levels of DNA damage or by the effect of cocaine in proteins involved in the genome segregation, namely mitotic simple proteins and cohesins. Accordingly, damage in these targets can lead to aneuploidy (Binelli et al. ). Using the same mollusk model, cocaine and BE in a mixture containing realistic concentrations of other illicit drugs revealed to be genotoxic in both comet and MN assays (Parolini et al. ). “Crack” cocaine also induced DNA damage in homogenized fractions of the digestive glands of the marine mussels Perna perna (Maranho et al. ). In fact, a significant increase in terms of DNA strand breaks was observed for a 48-h period of incubation with the highest concentration tested (500 µg/L) as evaluated by the alkaline precipitation assay. Lower concentrations did not lead to significant increases in DNA damage.
In what concerns the genotoxicity of cocaine in aquatic vertebrates, Parolini et al. ( ) have evaluated the effect of environmental concentrations (0.04–40 nM) of cocaine hydrochloride and of its major metabolites BE and EME in zebrafish embryo cells. In this report, significant increases in the % DNA in tail (comet assay) as well as in the MN frequency were observed. The authors also measured the activity of major antioxidant enzymes and the expression of the respective encoding genes and strongly suggested that oxidative stress is responsible for the results observed (Parolini et al. ). Overall, the available studies using non-mammalian tests pointed out that cocaine is a genotoxic agent in different species. In some studies, the positive results in terms of genotoxicity were obtained using low concentrations supporting the environmental concerns highlighted by different authors.
Genotoxicity of cocaine: evidences from human exposure
The genotoxic effects of cocaine in human exposed populations have gained an additional interest in the scientific community in the last decade. In fact, there are recent reports focusing on individuals that consume cocaine in a regular basis (Table 3 ). Many of these studies encompass the evaluation of the effects of “crack” cocaine comparing the frequency of biomarkers of genetic damage in cells of the exposed individuals with the respective control subjects. In this regard, the cytogenetic endpoint that has been more often preferred is undoubtedly the MN assay in buccal mucosa cells. Positive results were generally reported upon “crack” cocaine consumption using this methodology (Table 3 ).
Table 3 Overview of human exposure studies addressing the genotoxicity of cocaine Endpoint Type of exposure/human population Cell type analyzed Key findings a References 8-OHdG Any type/both sexes Extracellular (urine) Positive: increased urinary concentration in the exposed group ( n = 27) when compared to controls ( n = 26) Bacchi et al. ( ) Single strand breaks “Crack” cocaine; smoking/both sexes Alveolar macrophages Negative: the of % double-stranded DNA after alkaline unwinding in cells from the exposed group ( n = 9) was similar to the presented by controls ( n = 11) Sherman et al. ( ) Comet assay “Crack” cocaine; smoking/males PBL Positive: increased DNA damage rates in PBL from the exposed group ( n = 31) when compared with controls ( n = 40). Beneficial effect of drug withdrawal de Freitas et al. ( ) CBMN assay “Crack” cocaine; smoking/males PBL Positive: increased frequency of MN in PBL from the exposed group ( n = 31) when compared with controls ( n = 40). Increased frequency of NBuds but not of NPBs in PBL from the exposed group when compared with controls. No effect in the frequency of MN upon drug withdrawal de Freitas et al. ( ) Buccal MN assay “Crack” cocaine; smoking/males Oral mucosa cells Positive: increased frequency of MN as well as of KR and pyknotic cells in cells from the exposed group ( n = 10) when compared with controls ( n = 10) Almeida et al. ( ) Buccal MN assay “Crack” cocaine; smoking/males Oral mucosa cells Positive: increased frequency of cells from the exposed group ( n = 30) displaying MN as well as KL when compared with controls ( n = 30). No differences were found for pyknosis and KR Oliveira et al. ( ) Buccal MN assay “Crack” cocaine; smoking/mostly males Oral mucosa cells Positive: increased frequency of MN in cells from the tongue of individuals from the exposed group ( n = 26) when compared with the control group ( n = 35) Webber et al. ( ) Buccal MN assay “Crack” cocaine; smoking/males Oral mucosa cells Positive: increased frequency of MN in cells from the exposed group (15) when compared with controls ( n = 15). No significant differences for BN, BEgg, budding, pycnosis and KL. Increased frequency of KR in cells the exposed group Lima et al. ( ) Cytological alterations/MN “Crack” cocaine; smoking/males Oral mucosa cells Positive: cytological alterations where significantly higher in the exposed group ( n = 234) when compared with respective non-user control ( n = 120) Negative: no statistical differences between both groups where found for the induction of MN Albini et al. ( ) Buccal MN assay; oral lesions “Crack” cocaine; smoking/both sexes Oral mucosa cells Positive: fundamental oral lesions and MN were significantly increased (2-fold and 3.5-fold, respectively) in consumers ( n = 54) when compared with non-user controls ( n = 54). KL and KR were also increased, although no changes were observed for BEgg Antoniazzi et al. ( ) Buccal MN assay Coca leaves; chewing/both sexes Oral mucosa cells Negative: the frequency of MN and NBuds was not affected. Increased frequency of KR and karyolysis in the cells from the exposed group ( n = 45) when compared with controls ( n = 23) Nersesyan et al. ( ) 8-OHdG 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine, PBL peripheral blood lymphocytes, CBMN cytokinesis-block micronucleus assay, MN micronucleus, NBuds nuclear buds, NPBs nucleoplasmic bridges, BN binucleated cells, BEgg broken eggs, KR karyorrhexis, KL karyolysis a ( n ) corresponds to the number of individuals
The importance of micronuclei as predictive biomarkers of cancer risk assessment has been previously demonstrated (Bonassi et al. ). Moreover, the MN assay in buccal cells is also an established marker for human cancer risks (Bonassi et al. ). MN has been used as recognized biomarkers of clastogenic and aneugenic effects, evaluating structural and numerical alterations of the chromosomes, respectively. In what concerns the MN assay performed with buccal mucosa cells, often called the buccal micronucleus cytome assay (Thomas et al. ; Bolognesi et al. ), the formation of MN is the central event for the assessment of the genome integrity. Nevertheless, additional biological indicators can also be incorporated in the assay reflecting either other types of DNA damage or cytotoxic events. In fact, besides the evaluation of MN, the presence of other alterations in the exposed cells can be valuable for a thorough perspective of the effects induced by cocaine. Alterations that can reflect additional impairment of DNA integrity include the presence of binucleated cells, i.e., cells with two nuclei, generated upon disturbances occurred at the mitotic spindle and nuclear buds (NBuds, sometimes called broken eggs). The latter have been considered a biomarker of gene amplification (Fenech ). In addition, cytotoxicity features associated with the MN assay in buccal cells are also usually recorded, corresponding to anomalies that reflect acute cell death (Nersesyan et al. ). These alterations include: pyknosis, i.e., cells containing small, dark and dense nuclei without perceptible chromatin (pyknotic cells—PC); karyorrhexys (KR), i.e., cells presenting chromatin condensation in particles, displaying nucleus fragmentation in several small round/oval bodies in intact cytoplasm and karyolysis (KL), i.e., absence of nucleus in the cells (Lima et al. ).
The results from the human studies concerning the genetic damage in buccal cells show that “crack” cocaine consumption can be considered an effective driver of MN formation. An early study on illicit drug addiction, reporting a complex pattern of drug consumption that included “crack” cocaine, found an increase in the frequency of MN, albeit this increment did not reach the statistically significant level (Lima et al. ). Subsequent studies consistently showed positive results in terms of MN formation in the cells of “crack” cocaine abusers (Almeida et al. ; Oliveira et al. ; de Freitas et al. ; Webber et al. ; Lima et al. ). Other alterations were also found to be present in some studies, namely NBuds. Moreover, some authors also observed differences in terms of KR and KL (Table 3 ).
Recently, a group of 234 “crack” smokers and respective controls have been evaluated using conventional exfoliative cytology to explore complementary types of deleterious effects to the oral mucosa (Albini et al. ). Several cytopathological alterations were described and a significant correlation was found between the high quantity of “crack” rocks smoked per week and increased values of cytoplasmic area, the absence of keratinization, and the presence of enucleated superficial cells. Also the frequency of BN cells was increased in the “crack” user group. It was suggested that crack smoking leads to intense inflammatory alterations and early indicators of malignant transformation. The presence of MN in the exfoliated cells was also considered in this study, although no significant alterations were found in the frequency of this biomarker. The authors argued that the absence of positive MN results might be related to the inclusion of smokers and alcoholic in both case and control groups (Albini et al. ).
More recently, “crack” users and respective controls were also evaluated for the occurrence of fundamental oral lesions and genotoxicity features, particularly MN (Antoniazzi et al. ). Considering the individuals belonging to each group ( n = 54) and after controlling for different confounding factors, the authors found in “crack” users increases of approximately 2-fold and 3.5-fold for oral lesions and MN, respectively. Broken eggs were unchanged upon “crack” consume.
Overall, there is clearly a genotoxic and cytotoxic impact of “crack” cocaine in the exfoliated oral mucosa cells from exposed individuals. It is important to underline that these cells are closely in contact with cocaine upon “crack” smoking. The majority of the studies in Table 3 compare male consumers of “crack” cocaine with control groups, being the number of individuals enrolled in both groups in the same range. In most of these studies, the number of individuals (consumers and controls) cannot be considered large. Nevertheless, these studies are considered relevant since they provide evidence in humans that actually consume “crack” cocaine, many of them in a regular basis and for a long time.
One aspect that should be taken into account when we are addressing cocaine effects is the possibility of some of the observed effects could be due to other abused drugs, ethanol or cigarette smoking. This complex pattern of exposure that includes others toxicants is a realistic possibility among cocaine abusers and careful considerations should be made as emphasized by Bishop et al. ( ) in the context of developmental toxicity. In fact, in some of the abovementioned articles, the consumers also stated to consume ethanol or other recreational psychoactive substances.
Another topic for discussion is the origin of these populations of “crack” cocaine consumers. In the reports presented in Table 3 , the subjects were essentially from different regions of Brazil. This is not completely unexpected since “crack” cocaine is considered epidemic in Brazil, with an impressive estimated number of more than one million of consumers during the past 12 months, representing 20% of the global consumption (Abdalla et al. ; Ribeiro et al. ). Nevertheless, additional studies with other populations with distinct genetic origins can be useful to gather additional data on this issue.
A further aspect that should also be explored in exposed individuals is the evaluation of the genotoxic effects of cocaine in other types of cells. In fact, there is scarce information on this topic, albeit alveolar macrophages from “crack” cocaine abusers have been studied using fluorescence analysis of DNA unwinding (Sherman et al. ). In the mentioned study, no differences in terms of single-strand breaks were observed for individuals exposed to cocaine alone when compared with the respective control group. Nevertheless, the authors also observed that concomitant tobacco smoking increased DNA damage in the alveolar macrophages of cocaine smokers.
More recently, the effects of “crack” cocaine in peripheral blood lymphocytes using the comet assay and the CBMN assay were evaluated in a male population of “crack” cocaine users upon admission to a rehabilitation clinic (de Freitas et al. ). The authors reported significant increases in the genetic damage using both assays when compared to non-exposed controls. In fact, increases of the % DNA damage (approximately 2.3-fold), in the frequency of MN (approximately 3-fold) and in the frequency of NBuds (approximately 4-fold), were registered. No significant alterations were observed in terms of NPBs. In what concerns the effects of the treatment at the clinic, the % DNA damage assessed by the comet assay decreased by the end of the 21–30-day period of treatment, a result that was attributed to the “crack” cocaine withdrawal. In contrast, the frequency of MN did not decrease, whereas the frequency of NBuds increased by the end of treatment (de Freitas et al. ).
It is worth mentioning that it is needed to explore the effects of other forms of cocaine consumption in human populations, especially regarding intranasal cocaine administration or coca chewing. Nevertheless, an exception to the scarcity of such types of studies is the work of Nersesyan et al. ( ) performed with coca chewers using the buccal MN assay. In this report, the authors studied a group of chewers ( n = 45) and respective controls ( n = 23) living in Altiplano of the Peruvian Andes. The results obtained with a large number of cells scored did not reveal an additional genotoxic burden caused by coca leaves chewing either in terms of MN or NBuds, although the frequency of cells displaying KR and KL, events associated with cytotoxicity, were increased. Surprisingly, a decrease in the frequency of MN was observed in the highest exposure group of coca chewers. Particularly interesting, the authors claimed that several chemicals usually present in the content analyzes of coca leaves, including vitamins, micronutrients and polyphenols, have been reported to be protective for the genetic material.
Overall, the studies available suggest that “crack” cocaine significantly induces genetic damage in humans, especially in terms of the micronuclei in buccal cells. While this deleterious effect is not particularly pronounced, at least in some reports, it is quite consistent among studies. However, it is also clear that additional work is needed for the evaluation of other types of cocaine administration, i.e., inhalation.
Mechanistic insights: possible mode(s) of action of cocaine as a putative genotoxic psychoactive substance
The comprehension of the MoA of a given genotoxic agent is of utmost importance. The relevance of this mechanistic knowledge is fully justified since it has straightforward repercussions in terms of risk assessment (Bolt et al. ). Moreover, concurrent mechanisms of genetic damage may exist for a genotoxic agent, rendering different consequences for the fate of the cell/organism. Nevertheless, a set of irrelevant mechanisms for positive genotoxicity data of chemicals can also been pointed out and have been thoroughly discussed (Kirkland et al. ). Many of these arguments are indeed pertinent and should not be disregarded.
It is generally accepted that a DNA-reactive mechanism (e.g. the formation of DNA adducts) has a greater impact in terms of cancer risk assessment than other types of MoA (Bolt et al. ). In this regard, it is important mention that no evidence of DNA adducts generated by cocaine has ever been reported or is available. The need for this evaluation was previously proposed by Sastry ( ) in the context of placental toxicology, stating that selective DNA adducts of cocaine in the placenta have not yet been found.
Nevertheless, published reports with positive findings for cocaine genotoxicity usually provide suggestions concerning its MoA. Taken this into account, it is important to systematize in the present review the main mechanisms described or suggested in the literature to justify cocaine-positive genotoxicity data. The main mechanisms that have been pointed out are depicted in Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3 Overview of the main mechanisms pointed out in the literature that may support the genotoxic effects observed in cells or organisms exposed to different forms of cocaine
Besides the role of the pyrolysis products present specifically in the “crack” cocaine smoke that may entail genotoxic and carcinogenic substances, two major processes have often been described: the generation of ROS/oxidative stress and the interaction with mitotic proteins, suggesting that cocaine act as a potential human aneugen. Furthermore, the formation of formaldehyde via demethylation of cocaine is an additional aspect that should be considered. Below, some evidences and suggestions for the MoA(s) of cocaine in its different forms are reviewed.
Role of pyrolysis products present in “crack” cocaine
“Crack” smoking encloses an additional (geno)toxicological burden when compared with other forms of cocaine administration. The chemicals that constitute the smoke may cause irritation of subepithelial receptors upon inhalation. The blackened-pigmented sputum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid have also been linked with the excessive amount of carbonaceous residues of “crack” smoke (Almeida et al. ; Martínez-Girón et al. ).
While some compounds present or formed in the smoke are known for a long time, namely AEME and benzoic acid, others are not fully identified and may vary according to the type of “crack” cocaine consumed. Typically, cutting agents refer to diluents (pharmacologically inactive and readily available substances) and adulterants (pharmacologically active substances, usually more expensive or less available than diluents). Sugars (e.g., glucose, sucrose, lactose), talc, starch, and carbonates represent the principal diluents of cocaine, while phenacetin, acetaminophen, levamisole, caffeine, and lidocaine are its major adulterants in Europe (Broséus et al. ; Lapachinske et al. ; Martello et al. ). There are various ways to produce “crack” cocaine from powder cocaine and different methods may have diverse implications with regards to purity (reports ranging from 36 to 51%) and presence of adulterants (European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ). Analysis of almost 3,000 cocaine samples in the Netherlands showed a significant increase in the percentage of adulterants present between 1999 and 2007 (from 6.5% in 1999 to 57% in 2007) (Brunt et al. ). Particularly important is the use of levamisole-adulterated cocaine since it may be responsible for side-effects such as dermal vasculopathy, leukoencephalopathy, leukopenia, agranulocytosis, pulmonary hemorrhage, multiple emboli, among others (Dinis-Oliveira et al. ). Berger et al. ( ) observed a slight excess of chromatid and chromosome breaks and gaps in both in vitro and in vivo studies. In addition, an excess of SCE was observed in vivo but not in vitro with similar levamisole concentrations. In what concerns the abovementioned “crack” smoke constituent benzoic acid, although not mutagenic in the Ames test, some authors have reported positive genotoxicity data in terms of chromosomal aberrations, SCE and MN in peripheral blood lymphocytes, considering this compound as a weak genotoxicant in comparison with mitomycin C, the well-known positive control (Yılmaz et al. ).
When smoked, “crack” can, therefore, produce additional pyrolytic products not cocaine dependent that may further aggravate the genotoxic effects of cocaine, but for these additional studies are needed. Overall, the possibility of other genotoxic chemicals may be present or formed due to the pyrolysis of cocaine upon smoking increases the cancer risks, since a complex mixture of toxicants are formed during combustion.
Role of oxidative stress
Oxidative stress is considered a key mechanism to take into account for the overall toxicology of cocaine. Indeed, evidence suggests that the production of ROS plays an important role in acute cocaine hepatotoxicity, both in vitro (Boelsterli and Goldlin ) and in vivo (Aoki et al. ), and uncoupling of both P450-mediated monooxygenase activity (Boelsterli et al. ) and mitochondrial respiration (Devi and Chan ) has been hypothesized as possible sources of ROS following cocaine administration.
Studies in mice demonstrated that cocaine decreases reduced glutathione (GSH) levels in the liver and that depletion of intracellular GSH concentrations exacerbated cocaine hepatotoxicity (Evans and Harbison ; Kowalczyk-Pachel et al. ). Neurotoxicity of cocaine has also been shown to be associated with the ROS being these species also involved in other forms of target organ toxicity.
In the scope of the present review, the formation of ROS by cocaine can also be considered pertinent due to the well-known impact of ROS in terms of oxidative DNA damage and human cancer. Many compounds have been pointed out to damage DNA via ROS generation albeit other mechanisms can also be present and considered relevant (Kirkland et al. ). Genotoxic mechanisms based on the formation of ROS and their impact in cancer risk assessment have been discussed by Bolt et al. ( ).
Several authors justify positive genotoxicity data displayed by different forms of cocaine with oxidative stress/ROS. This argument has indeed been used to explain the results observed in various types of cell models or organisms (Yu et al. ; Alvarenga et al. ; Parolini et al. , , ; Binelli et al. , ; Bacchi et al. ; Moretti et al. ). There are some lines of evidence that sustain the involvement of oxidative stress/ROS in the genotoxic effects of cocaine:
(a) Various sources for potential ROS generation: It has been demonstrated that cocaine is more genotoxic in vitro upon metabolism (Yu et al. ). While the oxidized metabolites per se might enclose a higher genotoxic potential compared to parental cocaine, it is also well known that different ROS can be formed upon biotransformation of cocaine, especially via isoenzymes of the cytochrome P450. Some of the metabolites of cocaine are also known to produce themselves ROS. The generation of ROS can occur via N -demethylation of cocaine which forms N -hydroxynorcocaine. This metabolite is promptly converted to norcocaine nitroxide radical, which along with its nitrosonium ion, has the potential to deplete GSH, to induce lipid peroxidation events and to bind to macromolecules (Yu et al. ). Formaldehyde is also reported to produce ROS (Dahl and Hadley ) and deplete GSH. The importance of this cocaine metabolite will be further addressed in the present review. Superoxide radical and hydroxyl radical can be generated upon biotransformation of cocaine and via Fenton reaction (Yu et al. ). Moreover, ROS can also be formed due to calcium ion imbalance as described in Binelli et al. ( ) or as consequence of a decreased stability of lysosomal membranes (Binelli et al. ). (b) Alterations in oxidative stress biomarkers: Another point supporting this MoA is the occurrence of oxidative DNA damage and the rise of other biomarkers of oxidative stress in cells or organisms exposed to different forms of cocaine or metabolites. Some published data using high-performance liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection (HPLC-ED) (Bacchi et al. ) or immunohistochemistry (Frustaci et al. ; Moretti et al. ) pointed out to the formation 8-OHdG upon cocaine exposure. This altered DNA base is considered as one of the key DNA lesions as recently reviewed by Suzuki and Kamiya ( ), being used for several years as a biomarker for DNA oxidation in view of its mutagenicity potential, through the generation of G → T transversions and other mutations. Nevertheless, the use of 8-OHdG as single biomarker of oxidative DNA damage in a given experiment has been criticized and some artifacts associated with this technique highlighted (Halliwell and Whiteman ). Oxidative DNA damage was also assessed by the comet assay in its modified version with formamidopyrimidine DNA glycosylase (fpg), a DNA repair enzyme from base excision repair that recognizes 8-OHdG. For individuals with more recent use of cocaine (< 30 days of abstinence), higher levels of oxidative DNA damage were observed in comparison with those with a greater abstinence period (≥ 30 days) (Winhusen et al. ). Other biomarkers of oxidative stress, namely lipid peroxidation and protein carbonyl content, were elevated in the gills of zebra mussels exposed to the metabolite BE (Binelli et al. ). (c) Antioxidant-based approaches: some approaches based either on the use of antioxidants in cell systems or in the evaluation of the activity and expression of antioxidant enzymes have been useful for the comprehension of the MoA of cocaine as a genotoxicant. As aforementioned, Yu et al. ( ) showed a significant reduction of cocaine-induced MN in S9-treated CHO cells in the presence of catalase and superoxide dismutase. The yields of BN cells with MN decreased to approximately half. These results likely reflect an extracellular detoxification of superoxide by the SOD added to culture medium, since superoxide anion does not easily cross the membrane. In the case of the protection afforded by catalase, its effect could be considered both intracellular and extracellular since hydrogen peroxide can, in general, readily cross the membrane (Halliwell and Whiteman ). In a different approach using the zebra mussel model as well as zebrafish embryos, some authors have found in different studies imbalances in the expression or activity of antioxidant enzymes (e.g., catalase, superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, peroxiredoxin-2) in the presence of cocaine or its metabolites (Parolini et al. , , ).
Generation of formaldehyde
The exposure to formaldehyde is undoubtedly an important issue in terms of cancer risk assessment. Occupational exposure to this toxic compound has been thoroughly described. In addition, as previously mentioned formaldehyde is also a metabolite of cocaine. Importantly, this compound is a ROS inducer, a genotoxic chemical, being classified by IARC as carcinogenic to humans (group 1) (Duong et al. ; IARC ; Bolt and Morfeld ). The impact of this by-product of cocaine abuse in the diverse studies with positive genotoxicity data is, however, not clear. In fact, the information concerning the concentrations formed, for instance, upon “crack” cocaine smoking, or in the mucosa affected by cocaine is almost inexistent. This topic should thus be further studied.
Interaction with key proteins involved in chromosome segregation
While the formation of cocaine DNA adducts is unproven, protein adducts have been demonstrated to be generated upon cocaine exposure, including in the plasma samples of cocaine abusers. In fact, as reviewed by Josephy and Mannervik ( ), cocaine can be subjected to a nucleophilic attack, being the parental compound responsible for this reaction while in contrast the effect of metabolism is protective. At molecular level, the ε-group of lysine was suggested to be the main amino acid target for adduction. The impact of this covalent bonding at protein level is unknown although it can be involved in the effect of cocaine in the mitotic spindle protein or cell cycle proteins. Some arguments in line with an aneugenic MoA have been described in the literature (Stefanidou et al. ; Binelli et al. ). In this regard, several articles suggested that cocaine indeed promotes numeric alterations of the chromosomes that can be observed in different cell models and organisms under different experimental conditions. Such findings were obtained for instance with mouse oocytes (Combelles et al. ), thymocytes (Wu et al. ) and hepatocytes (Cascales et al. ), as well as in the protozoa model Tetrahymena pyriformis (Stefanidou et al. ).
Concluding remarks and future perspectives
The genotoxic potential of cocaine in its different forms and routes of administration was herein thoroughly revised. The information reviewed comprised not only results from in vitro mammalian assays and in vivo animal experiments but also a number of studies regarding human populations exposed to cocaine, especially in terms of “crack” smoking. Additionally, several in vitro/in vivo studies with non-mammalian organisms were also incorporated in this review, and demonstrated positive genotoxicity data for cocaine. Many of these studies were performed with marine species which is valuable since cocaine is considered as an emerging (geno)toxicological pollutant that should be taken into account.
While several studies assessing cocaine-induced genetic damage have been reported, further complementary endpoints, especially gene mutations (prokaryote and eukaryote cell systems), and additional data on cytogenetic assays performed with different cell types, including mammalian cell lines and human cells, are clearly needed. Particularly, studies using stimulated human lymphocytes and liver cells and the use of alternative in vitro cell models with metabolic competence may give additional insights on this matter (reviewed in Godoy et al. ). For instance 3D cultures of rat hepatocytes (Pinheiro et al. ) or hepatocyte-like cells derived from human mesenchymal stem cells (Cipriano et al. , ) that have been employed to tackle other toxicological issues could also be valuable in the context of cocaine exposure. Moreover, the assessment of the genotoxic potential of cocaine metabolites as well as of the pyrolytic chemicals of “crack” smoke in mammalian cells or in rodents could also be important.
Many studies rely on the use of MN, which can be considered a biomarker of clastogenic and/or aneugenic effects. These structures were often significantly increased upon “crack” cocaine smoking in buccal mucosa cells, although higher yields of MN have also been found in peripheral lymphocytes (Table 3 ). Nevertheless, to the extent of our knowledge no published MN study distinguished between structural and numerical alterations using probes for the centromere (FISH). It should be noted that the relevance of MN is now increasing, along with the discovery of the new mutational phenomenon termed chromothripsis, involving the formation of MN. These new findings emphasize MN as active players in the formation of DNA lesions (Terradas et al. ).
The comet assay was also used by different research groups to assess DNA damage. However, there is less information on the effect of cocaine and/or its metabolites in the modified comet assay with BER glycosylases to detect oxidative DNA damage. It should be noted that this experimental variation increases the sensitivity of this technique and should be quite important in this context due to the oxidative metabolism of cocaine.
Some major limitations of the aforementioned studies concerning cocaine genotoxicity have been discussed in the literature. One critical issue is the range of concentrations or doses used in the in vitro and in vivo studies, respectively. Indeed, in some studies with positive findings, but not all, the level of exposure of the cells or organisms to cocaine is very high, even considering extreme patterns of drug abuse. This point has been raised by comparing the concentrations used in the experimental studies with plasmatic levels in cocaine abusers. Nevertheless, some authors argue that a high concentration level might be achieved locally in the lungs or nasal cavity of heavy of chronic abusers (Yu et al. ; Bacchi et al. ).
Regarding human data, other limitations already mentioned are the number of individuals exposed and non-exposed to cocaine, which is rather small, at least in some reports, as well as the characteristics of the control group. In addition, it is sometimes somehow difficult to attribute the effects solely to cocaine, since a complex exposure scenario may be present, with the concomitant exposure to tobacco smoke, ethanol or other psychoactive substances. Nevertheless, this issue has been discussed and considered, in at least some of the studies, with the inclusion of adequate control groups or by controlling confounding variables.
In conclusion, the genotoxicity of cocaine is still a matter of discussion. While some studies failed to demonstrate cocaine-induced genotoxic effects, many others revealed that this psychoactive substance can actually lead to genetic damage. In fact, genotoxic effects of cocaine were found in different cells and organisms using various endpoints and experimental conditions, being particularly relevant the studies with drug abusers in the context of “crack” cocaine smoking. Nevertheless, some limitations of the studies available should also be considered in the critical review of the cocaine data. Finally, diverse mechanisms may be involved in the genotoxic burden caused by cocaine, suggesting the possibility of more than one MoA.