Introduction
The relationship between patients and their doctors is unique and often characterized by immediate intimacy and trust [ ]. Especially in cancer care, where patients and their families often experience significant emotional distress and feelings of uncertainty about their future, and where patients have to deal with complex medical information and make difficult, life-altering treatment decisions, patient centeredness requires patient/family-clinician relationships that are characterized by trust and rapport [ , , ]. Patients need to rely on their oncologist to support them at each step of a decision making process [ ]. In colon cancer care, strong trust in the health care providers has been shown to guide patients’ follow-up care experiences [ ]. Numerous definitions of trust have been proposed. The majority refer to the “optimistic acceptance of a vulnerable situation in which the truster believes the trustee will care for the truster’s interest” [ ]. Trust has multiple dimensions: fidelity, competence, confidentiality, honesty, global trust, control, and caring [ , , ]. When confronted with a serious diagnosis, patients may feel the need to trust their physicians doing everything they can to obtain the best treatment outcomes possible [ ]. A trusting patient-physician relationship may result in facilitated communication and medical decision making, a decrease of patient fear, better treatment adherence, and better health-related quality of life [ , ], but the findings are inconsistent so far [ ]. Besides the characteristics of the interaction between patient and physician, personality traits and individual characteristics of the patient seem to affect the successful building of a trusting relationship. Older and lower educated patients were shown to be more trusting [ ]. It has recently been shown that insecurely attached patients trust their physicians less than securely attached patients [ ]. There is first evidence that the attachment style might also be a moderator of the association between trust and patient reported outcomes in oncology: Lower levels of trust were associated with more emotional distress and more limitations in health-related quality of life in more anxiously attached patients [ ].
A central characteristic of the patient-physician interaction regarded as prerequisite of building a trustful relationship is physicians’ empathy. Empathy in the clinical encounter can be defined as the socio-emotional competence of a physician to be able to understand the patient’s situation, perspective, and feelings, to communicate that understanding and check its accuracy, and to act on that understanding with the patient in a helpful (therapeutic) way [ ]. Without it, a therapeutic alliance between the patient and the physician cannot be established and both diagnosis and treatment are hindered [ ]. Especially, emotional implications of the disease cannot be handled adequately [ , , , , , , ]. A caring communication was further found to influence patient health outcomes; i.e., symptom resolution, blood pressure, blood sugar level, and pain control [ ], the decision to sue doctors and hospitals [ ]; and patients’ satisfaction. If the physician cannot establish an open and empathetic atmosphere, the diagnosis workup might be unfocused, the correct diagnosis might be missed, and the clinical care might be marked by noncompliance or the search for another opinion [ ]. The treatment options in cancer care must consider the patient’s goals, resilience, personal and family resources, perceptions of quality of life, willingness to tolerate side effects and adverse outcomes, and expectations for closure [ ]. Poor communication has been shown to be associated with poor health outcomes, dissatisfaction, and medical malpractice [ ].
Theoretical models explain how empathy can lead to improved patient outcomes [ , , ]. They describe affective pathways of empathic communication leading to patients’ emotion of feeling understood, and cognitive pathways postulating that patients, when experiencing physician’s empathy, are supposed to tell more about their symptoms and concerns, facilitating the physician to collect more detailed medical and psychosocial information. This in turn leads to a diagnosis that is more accurate and helps the physician to understand and respond to the individual needs of the patients. This cognitive pathway may result in stronger adherence to treatment regimens and preventative strategies. Thus, patients may experience improved long-term health outcomes.
While the evidence on the distress and psychosocial burden of cancer patients and the potential benefits of a patient-centered-communication and a trustful patient-physician relationship is growing, still, little is known to the oncologists’ perceptions of the interaction with their patients. There is first evidence that oncologists feel stressed due to heavy workload and time pressure which affects patient-physician communication negatively [ ], that oncologists perceive different barriers for psychosocial communication including insufficient consultation time, lack of resources for taking care of problems discovered, and lack of methods to evaluate patients’ psychosocial health in clinical practice [ ] and that communicating with and caring for cancer patients cause considerable psychosocial burden for oncologists [ ]. However, assessments of oncologists’ perceptions of individual interactions with patients that can be matched to patient data are still missing.
Research Question
Theoretical models and first empirical evidence suggest a strong association between the patient-physician relationship and treatment outcomes in medicine. However, there are several limitations regarding the current evidence: prospective data allowing the analysis of changes over time in patient-reported outcomes considering the patient-physician communication is still rare. Most of the existing studies are limited by common method bias in terms of resting upon patients’ assessments instead of collecting different perspectives of the communication or the relationship between physician and their patients, and factors mediating the association between communication and treatment outcomes have not been examined in depth.
Therefore, the present study, using a prospective approach based on matched oncologists’ and patients’ survey data to overcome the current limitations, was conducted to examine the impact of the patient-physician relationship on psychological and physical patient-reported outcomes of cancer treatment and factors mediating this relationship. We hypothesize that (1) patients’ trust in physicians as central aspect of the patient-physician relationship is positively associated with changes in health-related quality of life, and that (2) patients’ trust in physicians has indirect effects on changes in health-related quality of life by enabling patients according to the described cognitive pathway.
Methods
Study Design and Participants
The study was reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty of the University of Cologne. All physicians and patients participating in the study gave written informed consent. This was a prospective study in 2012 and 2013 in a representative sample of private practices of German oncologists. The basic population consisted of all members of the Professional Organization of Office-Based Hematologists and Oncologists ( N = 551). All members were invited to participate. Patients were eligible for participation in this study, if they suffered from newly diagnosed colon cancer and had their first visit in private practice oncology. Patients filled out a standardized questionnaire prior to their first consultation (T0), directly after the first consultation (T1), and after 2 months (T2). Oncologists filled out a standardized questionnaire after the first consultation with each patient included in the study. The patient survey was conducted according to the Total Design Method with three postal reminders [ ]. The minimum number of participants required for multilevel analysis was determined by an a priori power analysis. The aim was to include n = 144 oncologists each including at least N = 9 colon cancer patients per practice in the study.
Measures
Patients’ trust in physician was assessed with a subscale of the Cologne-Patient-Questionnaire (CPQ). The CPQ was developed and has been validated in several research projects [ ]. The subscale “trust in physicians” measures different aspects of a trusting physician-patient interaction with five items. Four answer categories were given, ranging from “do not agree at all” to “completely agree”. Patients’ enablement was measured with two items of the Patient Enablement Instrument [ ] to be rated on a 5-point scale from “much better” to “much worse”. Patients are asked to assess whether they feel changes in understanding their illness and coping with their illness as a result of their visit of the oncologist. Oncologists’ satisfaction with the consultation and the extent to which the oncologists felt able to put themselves in the position of the patients were assessed with two items that were rated on 5-point scales from “dissatisfied” to “satisfied” and “not good” to “very good”. The items were self-developed by the research team and oncologists and pretested with think-aloud-interviews. The QLQ-C30 questionnaire version 3 of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) [ ] was used to assess cancer-specific quality of life as second patient reported outcome. The questionnaire measures general aspects of health-related quality of life. It incorporates five functional scales, three symptom scales, single items, and a global health status scale (global quality of life). Each item is scored in one of four categories “not at all”, “a little,” “quite a bit,” and “very much” with the exception of “global quality of life” which ranges from “very poor” to “excellent” [ ].
Data Analysis
Missing values were imputed by the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm [ ]. The imputation was performed with the NORM software. For descriptive analysis, the raw scores of the functional scales of the EORTC-QLQ-C30 were built by estimating the average of the items that contribute to one scale. A linear transformation was used to standardize the raw scores and obtain scores from 0 to 100. The items of the trust in physicians scale were built by summing up the items and dividing them by the number of items to build a sum scale. T tests were calculated to test for significant differences in health-related quality of life between T 1 and T 2 . Standardized response means were calculated to assess the responsiveness of the EORTC-QLQ-C30.
A confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was conducted to determine whether the intended constructs were indeed measured. Theoretical constructs and association between the constructs were defined and estimated using a structural equation modeling approach [ ]. This approach is advantageous because it allows to model complex theory-based model structures and estimates latent variables, which possess optimal psychometric properties (separation of true and random noise components). Accordingly, more valid and reliable estimates of construct associations can be determined. This is especially important for the measurement and analysis of change. As manifest difference indicators of change do not allow to indicate changes reliably and validly, we used a psychometrically appropriate approach to analyze true intraindividual change proposed by Steyer, Eid, and Schwenkmetzger [ ]. This approach defines change as a latent construct reflecting information which is specific for the second measurement point in time.
For the descriptive statistics and the t tests, IBM SPSS statistics 21 was used. Standardized response means were calculated using the statistical software MedCalc. The maximum likelihood estimation procedure [ ] implemented in the software AMOS was used for confirmatory factor analysis and structural equation modeling.
Results
One hundred fifty-seven oncologists responded to the baseline survey (response rate 28%). In terms of gender, geographical location, and urban or suburban area of practice, no statistically significant deviation of the participants from the basic sample was found. Data of 44 oncologists could be matched to colon cancer patients’ survey data. Seventy percent of this subsample are male oncologists; the mean age is 51 years. The majority is practicing in the western states of Germany (86%).
Fifty-seven percent of the N = 131 colon cancer patients are male and the mean age is 64 years. Eighty-nine percent have a statutory health insurance. Most of the patients are living with a partner (69%). In terms of cancer stage, the majority of patients have an initial colon cancer diagnosis (80%) followed by a second tumor (9%) (see Table 1 ). Table 1 Sociodemographic characteristics of oncologists and patients Oncologists Mean (SD) Number Percentage Number Age 51.4 (5.35) 43 Sex Male 68.2 30 Female 29.5 13 Missing 2.3 1 City Western states of Germany 84.1 37 Eastern states of Germany 13.6 6 Missing 2.3 1 Patients Mean (SD) N Age 63.7 (10.75) 131 Sex Male 56.5 74 Female 42.7 56 Missing 0.8 1 Insurance Statutory health insurance 88.5 116 Private health insurance 11.5 15 Missing 0% 0 Marital status Living with a partner 69.4 91 Solitarily 27.5 36 Missing 3.1 4 Cancer stage Initial colon cancer diagnosis 80.2 105 Second tumor 8.4 11 Recurrent colon cancer 0.8 1 Missing 10.6 14 SD standard deviation
Table 2 illustrates the descriptive characteristics of the items and scales, the results of the t test for the functional scales of the EORTC-QLQ-C30 at T 1 and T 2 and the corresponding standardized response mean. The physical and cognitive functioning scores decrease from T 1 to T 2 ; the scores of role, emotional, and social functioning increase from T 1 to T 2 . Significant differences can be found for the decrease of physical and cognitive functioning from T 1 to T 2 . The standardized response mean values are low for physical, role, emotional, and social functioning. The standardized response mean of cognitive functioning indicates a moderate effect size. Table 2 Descriptive characteristics of the scales and items Patients: health-related quality of life Mean (SD) T 1 Number Mean (SD) T 2 Number T p SRM Physical functioning 71.46 (24.19) 131 68.22 (24.38) 131 1992 .048 −0.16 Role functioning 49.65 (31.97) 131 54.81 (30.92) 131 −1883 .062 0.16 Emotional functioning 61.91 (24.24) 131 63.85 (25.82) 131 −1027 .306 0.09 Cognitive functioning 82. 16 (23.46) 131 73.47 (24.40) 131 4726 .000 −0.40 Social functioning 60.21 (28.48) 131 64.44 (28.71) 131 −1749 .083 0.15 Oncologists: Communication Mean (SD) T 1 N Min T 1 Max T 1 Satisfaction with consultation 3.71 (0.55) 131 2.00 5.00 Feeling able to put themselves in the position of the patient 3.88 (0.77) 131 2.00 5.00 Patients: patient-physician relationship Mean (SD) T 1 N Min T 1 Max T 1 Trust in physician 3.77 (0.36) 131 2.40 4.00 Enablement by physician 4.10 (0.81) 131 1.00 5.00 SD standard deviation, Min minimum, Max maximum, SRM standardized response mean, T1 directly after the first consultation, T2 after 2 months
Confirmatory factor analysis showed an acceptable fit after eliminating two indicators due to low indicator reliabilities (“Do you need to stay in bed or a chair during the day?” and “Do you need help with eating, dressing, washing yourself or using the toilet?”) and after allowing for the correlation of two pairs of error terms—“Do you have any trouble doing strenuous activities, like carrying a heavy shopping bag or a suitcase?”(physical functioning) and “Did you feel depressed?“ (emotional functioning); “Have you had difficulty in concentrating on things, like reading a newspaper or watching television?“ (cognitive functioning) and “Has your physical condition or medical treatment interfered with your family life? “(social functioning)—resulting in a model with χ 2 (148) = 236.88; CFI = 0.95; TLI = 0.94; RMSEA = 0.06 [ , ] (see Table 3 ). Indices of local fit proved that each latent construct was reliably measured by its indicators and that all factor loadings were significant (see table 3 ). The factor reliabilities and average proportions of indicator variance extracted by the latent constructs achieved the thresholds for acceptable fit. A marginal violation was observed for “cognitive functioning” (see Table 4 ). Table 3 Measures of global fit Х 2 d.f. p Х 2 /d.f. TLI CFI RMSEA Thresholds for acceptable fit <3 ≥0.95 ≥0.95 <0.08 Confirmatory factor analysis Original CFA model 324.86 189 .000 1.72 .91 .93 .07 Modified CFA model 236.88 148 .000 1.60 .94 .95 .06 Structural equation model Full path model 674.58 470 <0.001 1.44 0.91 0.93 0.06 TLI Tucker-Lewis index, CFI comparative fit index, RMSEA root-mean-square error of approximation Table 4 Measures of local fit for the modified CFA model Thresholds for acceptable fit Item Indicator reliability t value of factor loading Factor reliability Average variance extracted ≥0.3 ≥0.6 ≥0.5 Trust in physician Honesty .50 9.67* .88 .61 Trust .79 12.65* Active listening .54 10.08* Expertise .48 9.59* Feeling comfortable .64 - a Enablement by physician Understanding .83 - a .73 .69 Coping .81 11.17* Physical functioning Strenuous activities .74 - a .88 .71 Long walk .81 14.25* Short walk .52 10.78* Role functioning Work .83 - a .88 .78 Hobbies .73 12,58* Emotional functioning Feeling tense .55 - a .85 .59 Worry .66 10.13* Feeling irritable .39 7.69* Feeling depressed .72 10.53* Cognitive functioning Concentrating .50 5.403* .65 .49 Remembering .41 - a Social functioning Family life .53 - a .79 .65 Social life .79 8.78* a Unstandardized values were set equal 1 in order to ensure identifiability * p < 0.001
Measures of global fit of the final structural equation model are acceptable ( χ 2 (470) = 674.58; CFI = 0.93; TLI = 0.91; RMSEA = 0.06) [ , ]. Significant associations were found between trust in physician and changes in physical functioning between T 1 and T 2 ( β = .50; p < .01) and between trust in physician and patient enablement ( β = .61; p < .01). Patient enablement is significantly associated with changes in physical functioning between T 1 and T 2 ( β = −.54; p < .01). Physical functioning at T 2 is significantly associated with changes in role functioning ( β = .46; p < .01). Emotional functioning at T 2 is significantly associated with changes in social functioning ( β = .32; p < .01). Oncologists’ satisfaction with the initial encounter significantly predicts changes in patients’ emotional functioning between T 1 and T 2 ( β = .31; p < .01) (see Table 3 , Figs. 1 and appendix for full SEM ). Fig. 1 Structural equation model. Note: Only significant pathways with standardized regression weights are displayed; Triangle : changes between T 1 and T 2
Discussion
The current evidence on the association between communication and treatment outcomes in medicine is limited. Prospective data allowing the analysis of the direction of associations are still rare, many studies are limited by common method bias, factors mediating the association between communication and treatment outcomes have not been examined in depth, and most studies are focussing on single aspects of communication instead of taking a wider perspective and examining the relationship build between patients and physicians. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to overcome the current limitations by using a prospective approach based on matched oncologists’ and patients’ survey data to examine the impact of the patient-physician relationship on patient reported outcomes and factors mediating this relationship.
According to our hypotheses, we found a significant association between trust in physician and changes in physical functioning. The physical condition is getting worse in the first months after surgical treatment with most colon cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy; those patients suffering more from treatment side effects obviously need to rely more intensively on their oncologist to support them during follow-up care. The significant association between trust in physician and patient enablement is in accordance with the theoretical assumptions. As expected, we found a significant pathway between patient enablement and changes in physical functioning. The association is negative, indicating that patient enablement is a chance to attenuate the negative side effects of colon cancer follow-up care. Our results are in accordance with latest longitudinal research to the influence of the patient-physician relationship on changes in health-related quality of life after breast cancer rehabilitation [ ]. Interestingly, we found no significant associations between the relationship variables and changes in other domains of health-related quality of life such as role, cognitive, and social functioning. Those aspects might be more subject to personal traits, coping styles, or social support that were not controlled for in our survey. In addition, of those domains that were not significantly associated with trust or enablement, only changes in cognitive functioning were statistically significant. The fact that cognitive functioning is impaired by chemotherapy cannot be influenced by the relationship to the oncologist. However, changes in emotional functioning have been shown to be significantly associated with the oncologists’ satisfaction with the first consultation, although those changes were not statistically significant. In contrast, the extent to which the oncologists felt able to put themselves in the position of the patients has no positive effects on changes in health-related quality of life domains.
Limitations
In interpreting these results, there are limitations of our study design that should be considered: First, the study was conducted in an observational design. The oncologists were aware of being observed by their patients, a fact which might have influenced their communication behavior. Second, it might have come to a selection bias in terms of highly motivated oncologists with good communication skills and less workload compared to their colleagues being overrepresented in our sample. The observational design and the possible selection bias might have contributed to the high ratings in trust by the patients. However, the longitudinal associations between the relationship variables and patient reported outcomes are solid and those effects are not subject to selection bias. Third, due to our selection criteria, we can only draw conclusions as to how the relationship between oncologists and their newly diagnosed colon cancer patients might influence treatment outcomes. However, since our results are based on theoretical assumptions and are in accordance with latest empirical evidence in breast cancer care, we can assume that our findings might be generalizable to other cancer forms or life-threatening diseases.
Future research should address other cancer types and more stages of the disease. The more advanced the cancer, the more important might become the patient-physician relationship for patients’ coping efforts and aspects of quality of life. On the other hand, finding and measuring relevant health outcomes that are sensitive to change is getting more and more difficult in palliative care situations. As Beckman et al. stated, “it will take extraordinary creativity to study which characteristics of long-term relationships lead to significant improvement in clinical outcomes over time” [ ]. The current results present only a small piece of evidence toward answering this question.
Practice Implications
Contemporary oncology practice acknowledges more and more the importance of partnering with the patient and family in dealing with the illness [ ]. But what kind of support do oncologists need to adopt ideal patient-physician communication models? Are the existing communication skills trainings adequate and will the psycho-oncology in the future cover not only patients but all medical providers who are dealing with cancer patients [ ]? Existing trainings address aspects of communication such as breaking bad news and discussing unanticipated adverse events, discussing prognosis, reaching a shared treatment decision, responding to difficult emotions, coping with survivorship, running a family meeting, and transitioning to palliative care and end of life [ ]; however, aspects of building and maintaining a trustful alliance to cancer patients are not yet addressed.
It has been shown that oncologists find patient loss particularly difficult for relational reasons, e.g., in instances where they feel close to patients and their families, when they have long-term patients, and when deaths are unexpected [ , , ]. Increasing physician self-awareness, which includes identifying and working with emotions that may affect patient care, is supposed to protect against a sense of failure or feeling of powerlessness against illness and its associated losses [ ], but comprehensive concepts or curricula are missing. Many complex communication models exist, but a model in which physician emotions are considered is of particular importance in patient-physician interactions in cancer care or near the end of life [ , ]. We will have to acknowledge the subjectivity of relationships and understand that the “quality of communication does not follow a linear scale” [ ].
Besides the aspects of role models or issues of training physicians’ personal attitudes and skills, the discussion with oncologists will have to address aspects of working conditions that allow oncologists to establish patient-centered care. Fagerlind et al. recently found barriers against psychosocial communication in oncology, i.e., insufficient consultation time, lack of resources for taking care of the problems discovered, and lack of methods for evaluating patients’ psychosocial health [ ]. Organizational factors have not been examined in private practice oncology as a possible explanatory cause of the deficits in physician communication so far. By doing further analyses of our study data, we will be able to link communication data to oncologists’ office structures and processes and to their work stressors and resources.
Conclusion
Our results underline the importance of building a close and trustful patient-physician relationship in the oncology encounter. In private practice oncology, where oncologists accompany their patients over a long and challenging period, physicians have the opportunity and face the challenge of building a relationship that “promotes comprehensive healing in medical and psychosocial domains” [ ]. One central mechanism of the association between the quality of the relationship and health outcomes seems to be the patient enablement by the oncologist. To enable patients to cope with their situation by making them understand their diagnosis, treatments, and side-effects can impact health-related quality of life in physical domains. This effect might be caused by stronger adherence to treatment regimens and preventative strategies, by increased motivational and emotional commitment to get well [ ], and by a better communication with regard to its informative, participative, and educative components [ ].