User-generated information on the Internet provides opportunities for the monitoring of health information consumer attitudes [ , ]. Online sources can provide a wealth of information about the audience’s attitudes toward a particular topic. Yet, while social media provide access to a large set of data provided by health information consumers, posts and conversations shared online are not readily actionable for decision-making due to their unstandardized format.
A limitation noted in previous research relates to the fact that the interpretation of online communication is limited to the explicit text used by those who share posts and comments. Does the audience understand a health recommendation? Are there uncertainties associated with shared information? To provide empirical evidence that could aid in answering these questions, this paper reports on the natural language indicators and standardized measurement of uncertainty associated with recommendations for skin cancer prevention. The goal of this study is to evaluate the extent to which uncertainty about cancer prevention recommendations expressed in user comments is associated with decisional conflict measured by a validated scale.
Health Recommendations and Uncertainty
Scientific evidence, and public health recommendations based on it, may carry substantial uncertainty, which is unlikely to be uniformly welcomed by the general public [ , ]. Cancer prevention recommendations are frequently multifaceted and provide health consumers with options and choices that lead to decisional conflict. This conflict can in turn lead to ambiguity and indecision related to preventive cancer behaviors. Han and colleagues provided a number of analyses of the Health Information National Trends Survey data and showed that perceived ambiguity about cancer prevention recommendations exhibited a strong negative relationship with perceived cancer preventability, but positively related to both perceived cancer risk and cancer worry [ , ].
For decades, researchers have studied individuals’ decision-making processes and propensity for engaging in recommended health behaviors under conditions of uncertainty [ , ]. These decisions are often characterized as being part of “value-expectancy models” [ ], where individuals base their behavior on the amount of value they predict to arise from an outcome. Indeed, the Health Belief Model developed by Rosenstock [ ], used as a way to predict and explain health-related behavior, posits that both perceived benefits and barriers of a health action have a direct effect on the likelihood of that action being undertaken.
Health information available to the public frequently carries conflicting recommendations and could lead to ambiguity and decisional conflict. Ambiguity refers to a type of uncertainty unrelated to perceptions of risk, specifically the source, reliability, and comprehensiveness of information about possible risks [ , , ]. Much like risk-related uncertainty, ambiguity has been shown to affect decision-making. Prior studies have shown that when making decisions under conditions of ambiguity, people were more likely to have negative outcome predictions and avoid decision-making altogether [ , , ].
The effect of perceived benefit in relation to health recommendations has become even more salient in the past few years as more scientifically accurate, nuanced health information is being made available to the public. With medical professionals embracing the ideas of shared and informed decision-making with patients [ ], more experts are willing to express uncertainties concerning the benefits and risks of various medical interventions [ , ]. The availability of complex, multifaceted health information may indeed help patients make more informed decisions, but it also raises potential issues. Complex information and increased choice can often lead to cognitive overload, which can hinder individuals’ decision-making capabilities [ ].
Measurement of the uncertainty regarding recommendations may be possible with traditional scales like the Decisional Conflict Scale [ ]. However, administration of a 16-item scale in the course of a short office visit may not be feasible. In addition, many health promotion and cancer screening campaigns are increasingly happening outside of the doctor’s office and within the context of mediated communication [ , ]. Here, social media comments shared by users can be used as indicators of health information consumers’ uncertainty about health promotion and cancer prevention messages.
Semantics and Language of Uncertainty
Semantics as a study of meaning focuses on the relation between human expression through language and the knowledge carried by signals, like words, signs, or symbols. The language used in messages can serve as a direct indicator of the uncertainty of the speaker [ ]. Cognitive semantics theory posits that natural language expresses implicit processes related to sense-making [ ]. Previous studies identified a number of grammatical constructs as signals of uncertainty. Possibility-indicating verbs send a message about speaker’s uncertainty (e.g., could, may, etc.) [ ]. Similarly, hedging (e.g., it sounds, I wonder, etc.) [ ] and qualifiers in form of modal adjectives (e.g., probably, likely) [ ] have been shown to be indicators of uncertainty about the conversation topic. Additionally, question asking is a sign of insufficient information, which can be interpreted as uncertainty [ ].
This study extends prior research on the use of natural language as a predictor of consumer attitudes and provides a link to decision-making. To evaluate the predictive role of uncertainty expressed in natural language, this paper asks a research question and proposes a hypothesis as follows:
RQ 1 : What are the natural language indicators of uncertainty?
H 1 : Uncertainty expressed in natural language comments will be associated with higher levels of decisional conflict related to skin cancer prevention recommendations.
Methods
Data Source
In this study, we were able to use the controlled environment of a survey to obtain user comments and examine decisional conflict in response to a message about conventional and nano-particle sunscreens. A nationally representative panel maintained by Qualtrics, a survey and consumer research company, was purposefully sampled in an omnibus survey on a variety of health and science communication topics. The survey included answers from 840 participants, 420 Caucasian and 420 African American. Participants’ age ranged from 18 to 84 years, and 72 % were female. After providing their demographic information, participants were presented with a short text about the differences in conventional sunscreens and sunscreens with nano-particles. Benefits and risks for each type of sunscreen were presented, and the text concluded with the words “whether you choose a conventional or nano-sunscreen, exposing unprotected skin to the sun’s ultraviolet light is one option that is definitely not safe.” The text was formatted to look like a Facebook post, and participants were next invited to submit a free-text comment about the information they just read. The majority of participants (91.3 %, N = 767) provided comments. After providing open-text responses, participants also completed the Decisional Conflict Scale [ ] (alpha = 0.966).
Comments were coded for the natural language indicators of uncertainty. To identify words associated with uncertainty, we reviewed literature published on language and health communication [ , ]. This review lead to the creation of an initial set of words indicating uncertainty, including modal verbs (could, would, should, might), hedging (seems, probably), and direct expressions of uncertainty (I am not certain, I do not know). Linguistic indicators were added to Excel formulas for automated coding. Next, a random sample of 50 comments was coded manually by two coders. A manual review of the statements allowed the identification of additional natural language indicators of uncertainty that were added to the match formula. When automated and manual coding did not match, linguistic elements of comments were reviewed and changes to automated coding were considered and made. This procedure was repeated three times. Next, 40 additional uncertain and 40 certain statements were reviewed. No new elements were identified after the third round of coding. Intercoder reliability, Cohen’s kappa, for manual coding was 0.92, and disagreements were discussed and resolved after each round of coding.
Results
Natural Language Indicators of Uncertainty
In total, 285 (37.40 %) out of 762 comments were identified as containing language that signals uncertainty, and 34.74 % ( n = 99) of participants who expressed uncertainty used more than one indicator. Coding of text and subsequent manual review by two coders identified specific lexical units related to the expression of uncertainty.
Answering the research question, the study identified the use of modal verbs, hedging, direct expression of uncertainty, and question asking as indicators of uncertainty. The five most commonly used words that expressed uncertainty were “would,” “confus*” (combined confused and confusing), “may,” “don’t understand,” and “kind of.” Some comments included more than one indicator.
The words that were initially included based on the literature but excluded based on manual coding were “should” and “I think.” In the comments analyzed in this study, the latter was used to state certainty rather than hedge a position: “The information above should be taken very serious if you are prone to any type of skin cancer. You should protect yourself at any cost, by choosing the correct sunscreen.” Furthermore, when uncertainty was expressed, other linguistic indicators of uncertainty were present: “I think it makes some good points about why you should choose nano-particle sunscreen. I just don’t understand the concept of it at the moment.”
Interestingly, the following three words were included in the automated coding based on previous studies but were not observed in any comment text: “uncertain,” “not certain,” and “unsure.” The full list of linguistic indicators and their observed frequencies are shown in Table 1 . Table 1 Natural language indicators of uncertainty in response to skin cancer prevention recommendations Indicators N (%) Examples a Possibility-indicating verbs “The use of nanoparticles in sunscreen may be a better approach in that it’s using an approach where additional chemicals would not necessarily harm the person and/or environment. This might be a better approach.” “It is important to protect your skin by using a sunscreen with an SPF of 15. Nano-sunscreens may be more harmful.” Would 45 (15.79 %) May 25 (8.77 %) Could 11 (3.86 %) Ought 6 (2.11 %) Might 3 (1.05 %) Hedging verbs “It sounds like Nano sunscreen is the best choice. I wonder how the other sunscreen affects me.” “I find the information confusing and left me wondering which sunscreen would be the best to use. In other words, which sunscreen is safest.” “It appears nanoparticles could prevent sunburn more effectively. But longer term studies need to be done, also.” “It all sounds pretty horrifying, unfortunately. However, it is a lot of information to take it. It all sounds pretty credible concerning the two types of sunscreens.” Sound 20 (7.02 %) Wonder 14 (4.91 %) Appear 7 (2.46 %) Believe 6 (2.11 %) Suggest 3 (1.05 %) Guess 3 (1.05 %) Assume 1 (0.35 %) Hope 1 (0.35 %) Doubt 1 (0.35 %) Debate 1 (0.35 %) Qualifiers “The difference between nanoparticles and non nano particles. One is bad for you and should probably avoid it.” “The information is quite understanding to me.” “Why do the EXPERTS say products may or may not cause cancer. the cure is almost always worse then the disease.” “It is hard to determine what is truly safe vs. harmful. confusing as to what is true.” “I’m kind of lost too as I rarely pay attention to sunscreen…just stay out of sun during peak hours so as not to burn but to receive Vitamin D.” Kind of 15 (5.26 %) Probabl* (combined 8 (2.81 %) probable and probably) Hard to 5 (1.75 %) Likel* (combined likelihood and likely) 4 (1.40 %) Often 3 (1.05 %) Possibl* (combined possible and possibly) 3 (1.05 %) Perhaps 3 (1.05 %) Rather 2 (0.70 %) Almost 2 (0.70 %) Fair 1 (0.35 %) Quite 1 (0.35 %) Direct expression of uncertainty “Sounds a bit confusing as to which one you should use. I don’t recall that I’ve ever heard of the nano-particle thing. I would think that part of the decision as to which one to use, may have something to do with the length of time you plan to be in the sun.” “I don’t understand why one should use sunscreen if they have not seen or had adverse affects without it. It appears that it is another ploy to line someone’s pockets.” “I knew sunscreen was a complicated business, I just didn’t know why. How do you determine what to use? There’s sunscreen with SPF up to 100 or more.” Confus* (combined confused and confusing) 36 (12.63 %) Don’t (do not) understand 20 (7.02 %) Worry/ied 14 (4.91 %) Not sure 11 (3.86 %) Don’t (do not) know 9 (3.16 %) Complicated 6 (2.11 %) Not convinced 2 (0.70 %) Chance 2 (0.70 %) Complex 1 (0.35 %) Uncertain 0 Unsure 0 Not certain 0 Question-asking “What are nanoparticles and what effect would they have on my health? Is this something new?” I have been using SPF 15 or higher for years. So, which one is better? “The question continues to be, “what is the value of current sun-blocks on the market” and are they effective enough to provide protection. I use the internet based on one question, which product is the best and go with that.” ? 21 (7.37 %) Question 7 (2.46 %) Ask 2 (0.70 %) a Original spelling and punctuation are maintained in all quotes
Language of Uncertainty and Decisional Conflict
The Decisional Conflict Scale, which measures whether individuals feel informed about choice, clear about values ascribed to choices, and certain about their decisions, was administered to assess study participants’ uncertainty related to the preference toward a sunscreen type. H1 predicted that those who express uncertainty through natural language also experience a higher level of decisional conflict. This hypothesis was supported. An ANOVA test compared decisional conflict scores between the participants who expressed uncertainty in their comments ( M = 4.19, SD = 1.66) and those who did not ( M = 3.75, SD = 1.77) and showed significant differences, p < 0.01, F (1, 760) = 11.13.
Discussion
This study evaluated the role of uncertain language used by information consumers to comment on recommendations about choices for skin cancer prevention. Overall, the study showed that the natural language expression of uncertainty and decisional conflict are strongly connected. Specifically, this study has several noteworthy results.
This study created a record of the language of uncertainty based on free-text comments from study participants. The evaluation of natural language used to indicate uncertainty showed that health information consumers use a number of linguistic instruments to express uncertainty, including the use of modal verbs, hedging, and question asking. However, no words that directly express uncertainty (e.g., uncertain, unsure, or not certain) were observed. Put within the context of semantics as the study of human communication and expression, this study extends the tradition of understanding natural language indicators as conceptual representations of meaning and knowledge [ ]. As such, it suggests that uncertainty experienced in relation to cancer prevention manifests in natural language. Next, this study evaluated natural language as an indicator of decisional conflict. The results show that natural language can serve as a possible proxy in assessing if individuals experience uncertainty related to health behavior recommendations. Active seeking of health information has been connected to better health outcomes, but uncertainty can cause intentional information avoidance [ ]. Acknowledging that conflicting information about health recommendation cannot be avoided; future research could evaluate strategies for assisting health consumers with decisional self-efficacy and resilience in the face of ambiguous and uncertain information.
Conclusions presented in this paper have several implications for the practice of health communication, education, and promotion. Online and social media channels contain rich data about health consumers, but the analyses of these data are substantially limited. The natural indicators of uncertainty reported here can be used to facilitate the monitoring of perceptions about cancer prevention recommendations and can inform communication campaign planning and evaluation. Consumer health informatics is another area of mediated communication that is developing as a tool for independent, informed decision-making and health outcome monitoring. Communication processes used by healthcare providers and health educators in systems like e-chart messages, emails, or community boards could be triaged and partially automated with the development of robust systems that can assess unstructured text messages. This study provides evidence supporting development in this direction. Finally, the results presented here can inform the practice of face-to-face health education and cancer education efforts, as they provide an unobtrusive way of assessing decisional conflict experienced by health consumers.