Introduction
Due to the high prevalence of pain and inflammatory diseases, paracetamol and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) belong to the most frequently used drugs in pregnancy. Although there is an ongoing discussion, paracetamol is used as an analgesic and antipyretic in any trimester of pregnancy. Well-proven NSAIDs, e.g., ibuprofen, are currently considered a further medication of choice in the 1st and 2nd trimester. In the 3rd trimester, however, NSAIDs and substances acting as partial prostaglandin antagonists like metamizole should not be used due to their known risk of fetotoxicity. Premature closure of the ductus arteriosus Botalli, impaired renal function leading to severe oligohydramnios, and persistent neonatal renal failure are dreaded adverse side effects after 3rd trimester exposure. In particular, the likelihood for ductal constriction and related complications increase with advancing gestational age. The sensitivity of the ductus arteriosus to prostaglandin inhibitors is very high in the late 3rd trimester [ ]. A few case reports even describe a complete closure of the ductus arteriosus after single doses of NSAIDs near term [ , , ].
However, there is some uncertainty whether NSAIDs may be considered a safe analgesic or antipyretic medication in the advanced 2nd trimester. Since NSAIDs are among the frequently used and recommended drugs in pregnancy, there is a need for well-grounded risk characterization. Therefore, the purpose of our approach was to identify published evidence for defined adverse events in the fetus after NSAID exposure in the 2nd trimester. We performed a systematic literature search to identify relevant case descriptions.
Methods
Initially, a systematic search was performed in PubMed identifying case descriptions on pre- and postnatal adverse effects observed with 2nd trimester exposure of NSAIDs previously published in MEDLINE. The final search approach was defined after testing several search strategies (Suppl. Table 1 ). The search included controlled terms for NSAID medication (Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms and pharmacological action (PA)) in pregnancy and defined adverse fetal outcomes. All indications for NSAID use were allowed. Restriction of the search strategy to the fetal period (“Pregnancy Trimester, Second” [MeSH] or “Pregnancy Trimester, Third” [MeSH]) resulted in a large number of missing relevant articles. Therefore, the PubMed search initially covered all trimesters in order to ensure a high sensitivity. Except for a filter for “species: humans”, no further limitations were set. Articles were not filtered based on publication types, publication date, or language. PubMed was searched on 17 Dec 2015 and again on 8 Feb 2018. Duplicate publications were excluded. Subsequently, in a first step, all titles and abstracts (filter 1) were independently screened by two authors according to predefined criteria (Suppl. Table 2 ). Relevant endpoints were ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, oligo- or anhydramnios, and fetal death, as well as neonatal renal insufficiency/failure and primary pulmonary hypertension (PPHT) in the neonate. Publications were also included if one author deemed the reference as potentially relevant. In a next step, full-text articles (filter 2) were assessed using identical selection criteria. Adding filter 3, we selected publications containing details on gestational weeks (GW) at NSAID exposure, dosage, treatment duration and indication, and fetotoxicity observed exclusively at GW ≤ 28. The relevant exposure and outcome characteristics had to be assignable to individual cases or at least to a defined number of cases. Only case reports on adverse effect at GW ≤ 28 clearly assignable to NSAID exposure fulfilled the inclusion criteria for further evaluation. Publications may have reported on more than one affected case. Publications (e.g., cohort studies) in which a case-specific assignment of NSAID exposure interval and an adverse event was not possible were excluded. Two additional publications were found by scanning the reference lists of the included full-text articles. The flowchart (Fig. 1 ) provides a numerical breakdown of the search approach identifying relevant publications. Relevant data were extracted from these publications and summarized individually in evidence tables. Table 1 Synopsis of affected fetuses by study endpoints Reference Summary of defined study endpoints ≤ GW 28 Ductus arteriosus constriction or closure Oligo-or anhydramnios Stillbirth Anuria, oliguria, renal failure PPHT Baker et al. 1993 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 25 x Bivins et al. 1993 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 27 (earliest) x Buderus et al. 1993 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 28 x Anuria, oliguria, renal failure x Gouyon et al. 1991 Anuria, oliguria, renal failure x Harada et al. 1997 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 25 (earliest) x Hickok et al. 1989 Oligo−/anhydramnios, GW 22 x Holmes et al. 2000 Oligo−/anhydramnios, GW 27 + 5 x (2 fetuses, twins) Jaqz-Aigrain et al. 1993 Anuria, oliguria, renal failure x Kirshon et al. 1991 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 26 + 0 x Oligo−/anhydramnios, GW 26 + 3 x (2 fetuses) Levy et al. 1999 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 27 (earliest) x (4 fetuses) Llanas et al. 1996 Anuria, oliguria, renal failure, GW 26 x (3 newborn, triplets) Lopes et al. 2016 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 27 and GW28 x (2 fetuses) Luchese et al. 2003 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 27 x (2 fetuses) Moise et al. 1988 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 28 (earliest) x (2 fetuses) Moise et al. 1993 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 25, GW 26 and 28 x (3 fetuses) Nishikubo et al. 1994 Anuria, oliguria, renal failure, GW 24 + 6 and GW 27 + 2 x (2 newborn) Pratt et al. 1997 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 27 + 5 x Respondek et al. 1995 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 26 x Savage et al. 2007 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 26 + 1; oligo−/anhydramnios, GW 22 + 3 x x Scherneck et al. 2015 Oligo−/anhydramnios, GW 21 + 3 x (3 fetuses, twins incl.) Shehata et al. 2006 Stillbirth, GW 27 x Tarcan et al. 2004 PPHT, GW 27 x Truter et al. 1986 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 26 x van den Veyver et al. 1993 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 24 + 1 x Vermillion et al. 1997 Ductus arteriosus constriction/closure, GW 24 + 1 (earliest), GW 26–28 x (10 fetuses) Voyer et al. 1994 Oligo−/anhydramnios, GW 28 x Sum 33 10 1 8 1 Legend: GW, gestational week; PPHT, primary pulmonary hypertension. Fig. 1 Flow chart of PubMed search and selection of publications. Some of the relevant publications ( n = 26) describe more than one case with the defined study endpoints at GW ≤ 28. Therefore, the overall number of affected cases is higher than n = 26. All included case descriptions are summarized in Suppl. Table 3 . The number of defined study endpoints published in the relevant literature is added up in Table 1 .
Results
The PubMed search resulted in 681 hits. After applying the selection criteria, we identified 26 publications reporting cases in which the defined study endpoints were observed after exposure to NSAID at GW ≤ 28. Some publications included more than one case description. The summary of case descriptions extracted from the literature is given in Suppl. Table 3 . A short synopsis adding up the numbers of the defined pre- and postnatal adverse events can be found in Table 1 .
Nineteen of 26 (73%) of the publications on fetal side effects on 2nd trimester exposure were published between 1986 and 1999, and only 7/26 (27%) were published since 2000 [ , , , , , , ].
The majority of published case descriptions (22/26) dealt with the use of NSAIDs for obstetrical indications comprising tocolysis and treatment of polyhydramnios and feto-fetal transfusion syndrome. Only 3/26 publications reported on NSAIDs used as analgesics [ , , ], and in one case, a NSAID was taken to attempt suicide [ ].
The majority of the identified descriptions of 2nd trimester fetal adverse effects were related to indomethacin treatment for tocolysis. Only 10 pregnancies with fetotoxic effects concerned other NSAIDs: acetylsalicylic acid [ ], diclofenac [ , ], ibuprofen [ ], ketoprofen [ , ], nimesulide [ , ], and piroxicam [ ]. These reports included two affected twin pregnancies [ , ] and one triplet pregnancy [ ].
Intrauterine narrowing or closure of the ductus arteriosus at GW ≤ 28 associated with NSAID exposure was described in 33 fetuses [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. The earliest gestational age of ductus arteriosus constriction was reported at GW 25 in five fetuses [ , , , , ]. The NSAIDs used in these cases were ibuprofen for several weeks [ ], indomethacin for a few days [ ], and a single dose of indomethacin 6 h before a mild ductus constriction was diagnosed [ ]. In two further cases, the duration of the indomethacin treatment was not specified [ , ].
Oligo- or anhydramnios was associated with 2nd trimester NSAID exposure in 10 fetuses [ , , , , , ] including two affected twin pairs and was observed earliest at GW 22 [ , ].
Postnatal impaired renal function leading to oliguria or anuria was described in 8 infants being exposed to NSAIDs exclusively in the 2nd trimester [ , , , , ] including affected triplets [ ] and one affected donor twin in a pregnancy with feto-fetal transfusion syndrome [ ]. In all of these cases with extremely premature newborns, the exposure-free interval was at most a few days.
One neonate twin born in GW 27 was diagnosed with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPHT) after only two doses of indomethacin within 16 h before birth [ ]. Another exposed pregnancy with feto-fetal transfusion syndrome treated with indomethacin from GW 20 to 27 resulted in a stillbirth in GW 27 of one twin, and the autopsy revealed a thrombotic occlusion of the ductus arteriosus [ ]. In another case, intrauterine death occurred in GW 31 due to hydrops fetalis most likely secondary to chronic ductus arteriosus constriction since GW 26. Indomethacin was given for tocolysis between GW 16 and 24 [ ].
In the majority of the identified publications, 2nd trimester fetal adverse events occurred after NSAID exposure of at least 7 days, often even longer. Not all publications report on the duration of NSAID treatment in detail. However, there are single reports of fetal side effects after NSAID exposure of less than 7 days [ , , , , , , , ]. Among these, constriction of the ductus arteriosus was reported after diclofenac exposure for 6 days [ ] and after indomethacin treatment for 6 days [ ], 3 days [ ], and 30 h [ ].
Discussion
Can well-studied NSAIDs be considered a safe medication against acute pain or fever in the 2nd trimester? Taking into account the high number of requests dealing with this topic that we receive at the Berlin Embryotox Institute daily, this question is highly relevant. By reviewing the published literature, we focused on the question of whether there is evidence for fetal adverse effects, in particular ductus arteriosus constriction and oligohydramnios at GW ≤ 28.
In the fetus, the ductus arteriosus shunts the output of the right fetal heart from the pulmonary trunk directly to the descending aorta, bypassing the pulmonary circulation. Severe narrowing or even complete closure of the fetal ductus arteriosus may result in right ventricular overload, heart failure, and, without further intervention, fetal death.
Only a few (7/26) of the relevant publications on fetal adverse effects of 2nd trimester NSAID exposure have been published since 2000. The majority of identified literature was published two decades ago and reports fetal adverse effects after indomethacin treatment for tocolysis (Suppl. Table 3 ). Since the 1990s, other tocolytics with different risk-benefit profiles, e.g., betamimetics, atosiban, and particularly nifedipine, are increasingly used [ ]. The findings of the studies on indomethacin for tocolysis may not be applicable to short-term analgesic or antipyretic NSAID use. As tocolytics are usually administered under close ultrasound monitoring, detection of reduced amniotic fluid or constriction of fetal ductus arteriosus as adverse drug effects is more likely in these cases. In contrast, temporary 2nd trimester analgesic or antipyretic NSAID medication is usually not monitored by fetal ultrasound. Therefore, at least transient fetal effects may be missed.
Overrepresentation of indomethacin for tocolysis in the identified literature may be explained by a larger number of exposed pregnancies, stronger toxicity of this NSAID, longer treatment duration for tocolysis than for other indications, or a detrimental effect of the treatment indication, i.e., premature labor. After birth, indomethacin is a well-established and potent drug in the pharmacological treatment of hemodynamically relevant patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) in the newborn [ , ]. Interestingly, recent meta-analyses have shown that high-dose ibuprofen (and even paracetamol) seems equally effective for PDA closure in preterm infants after birth [ , , ].
During pregnancy, the likelihood of ductal constriction in the fetus increases with advancing gestational age in the 3rd trimester with a significantly higher responsiveness to prostaglandin inhibitors from GW 31 to term [ , ]. Depending on gestational age and other treatment characteristics, indomethacin tocolysis was associated with ductus arteriosus constriction ranging from 6.5 to 86% [ , , , ]. Usually, ductus arteriosus constriction normalizes after cessation of NSAID exposure [ ].
Interestingly, Van den Veyver et al. reported that indomethacin levels had no predictive power in their study after an adjustment of relevant factors. Higher fetal serum levels did not correlate with higher rates of prenatal ductus arteriosus constriction [ ]. In contrast, investigations of different NSAIDs on ductus arteriosus constriction performed in full-term pregnant rats showed that substances differ substantially. Acidic NSAIDs comprising indomethacin, ibuprofen, diclofenac, and naproxen were more potent and led to a dose-dependent constriction if administered in doses equivalent to human anti-inflammatory doses [ , ].
Intrauterine constriction of the ductus arteriosus may occur spontaneously, i.e., independent of drug exposure. Some of the publications, identified for our investigations, shed light on this phenomenon. Luchese et al. reported on 20 fetuses with ductus constriction mainly during the 3rd trimester of which 13 were idiopathic and seven occured after maternal NSAID exposure. Two of the NSAID-exposed cases were observed at GW ≤ 28 [ ]. Leal et al. described five fetuses with ductus closure including three occurring spontaneously and two after 3rd trimester indomethacin exposure [ ]. In a retrospective cohort study from a fetal cardiology unit, Lopes et al. reported 29/45 fetuses with ductus constriction or closure associated with NSAID exposure, two of them at GW ≤ 28. In 8/45 fetuses, a previous exposure to other drugs or agents was reported, and in further 8/45, the ductus constriction was classified as idiopathic [ ]. No reliable population-based data on the incidence of idiopathic ductus arteriosus constriction in the fetus are currently available, but the observations above suggest a substantial proportion occurring spontaneously. As yet, there is no evidence that premature contractions, i.e., the treatment indication for (indomethacin) tocolysis itself, trigger ductus arteriosus constriction or vice versa. It is unlikely that ductus arteriosus constriction and related conditions play a major causal role for premature contractions and the decision to start tocolysis.
Severe ductus constriction leading to elevated right ventricular pressure may result in irreversible pulmonary vascular changes causing PPHT in the newborn [ , ]. Our literature search identified one case description of PPHT in a neonate twin born in GW 27 having been exposed to indomethacin within only 16 h before delivery. He died within the first two days of life. The second twin showed only mild respiratory distress [ ]. The causative role of NSAID exposure in this case must be critically questioned. There are estimates that PPHT in newborns is idiopathic in about 23% [ ].
In two cases of the identified literature with 2nd trimester NSAID exposure, fetal death was described, which may have resulted from an undiagnosed ductus constriction; one of them occured before GW 28. [ , ].
Amniotic fluid production depends on proper fetal renal function. Thus, oligohydramnios might be the result of NSAID-induced fetal renal damage. Cohorts exposed to indomethacin in the 2nd and 3rd trimester particularly for preterm labor report oligohydramnios rates between 7.3 and 89% [ , , , , , , ]. Long-persisting severe oligohydramnios may lead to limb positioning defects, Potter facies, and lung hypoplasia with respiratory failure after birth. Our literature search limited to NSAID exposure at GW ≤ 28 revealed 10 affected pregnancies. The earliest diagnosis of oligohydramnios in NSAID-exposed pregnancies was in GW 22 and concerned three fetuses: one twin pregnancy was exposed in a long-term manner to diclofenac [ ] and in another case the fetus was exposed to indomethacin for 1 week [ ]. In most cases describing oligohydramnios, amniotic fluid normalized after discontinuation of the medication. Nevertheless, the causal role of NSAIDs on amniotic fluid is difficult to assess given the heterogeneity of possible reasons for oligohydramnios. This applies in particular to situations with short-term medication and without an improvement after discontinuation.
Prenatal renal damage caused by NSAID may result in renal failure in the newborn presenting with oliguria or anuria. Some publications report on renal histologic changes supposedly caused by NSAIDs [ ]. We identified reports on preterm newborns affected by renal failure and maternal NSAID exposure at GW ≤ 28 shortly before birth [ , , , , ]. Such extremely preterm infants present, however, complex clinical problems. Since renal impairment may be related to prematurity, causality of NSAIDs is difficult to assess.
Although particularly ibuprofen is recommended worldwide against pain, fever, or inflammatory diseases up until the beginning of the 3rd trimester, published data on the defined fetal adverse events after short-term NSAID exposure in the 2nd trimester are scarce. Either there is no significant risk particularly of short-term use or related fetal side effects are reversible. In contrast to the 3rd trimester, ultrasound is not regularly recommended along with such treatment in the 2nd trimester. Thus, a certain number of transient adverse fetal effects may remain unrecognized. It is therefore difficult to estimate the true risk of such adverse effects based on the available data.
Conclusions
Apart from the well-known risk in the 3rd trimester of pregnancy, NSAID use may cause ductus arteriosus constriction and oligohydramnios also in the 2nd trimester. In cases of long-term NSAID use, fetal monitoring is recommended, in particular from GW 20 onward. However, short-term analgesic or antipyretic NSAID treatment not exceeding 1 week does not seem to carry a noteworthy fetal risk of cardiovascular or renal impairment during the 2nd trimester. Prospective studies focusing on 2nd trimester NSAID exposure are highly desirable for further assessment of drug safety.