Introduction
Many marketed drugs lack the authorization for specific use for the pediatric population. Despite the approval of the European Regulation for pediatric drugs [ , ], the impact of drug licensing is again lower than expected [ ]. Then too, children are often prescribed drugs that have been tested mainly in adults but are used as unlicensed or off-label. Off-label drug usage refers to drugs prescribed outside their licensed indications with respect to dosage, age, indication, or route, and unlicensed drugs are those whose formulation is modified and are prepared extemporaneously, those that are imported or used before a license is granted, or are chemicals used for therapeutic purposes [ ].
The purpose of off-label use is to benefit an individual patient. It is important to note that the term “off-label” does not imply improper, illegal, contraindicated, or investigational use [ , ]. To approve a drug for sale and marketing, the regulatory authorities require substantial evidence of efficacy and safety. Requests by a sponsor to add a new indication to drug labeling must also be accompanied by additional evidence in support of that indication. If the regulatory authorities find that this evidence supports approval, the new indication is added to the product labeling. The absence of labeling for a specific age group or a specific disorder does not necessarily mean that the drug’s use is improper for that age or disorder. It only means that the evidence required to allow inclusion in the label has not been submitted or approved by the regulatory authorities. Additionally, in no way does a lack of labeling signify that therapy is unsupported by clinical experience or data in children. It specifically means that evidence of drug efficacy and safety in the pediatric population has not been submitted to regulatory authorities for review or has not met the regulatory standards of “substantial evidence” for regulatory authorities’ approval [ , ].
In this a context between license, off-label use, physicians’ attitudes and legal concern, producers’ interests, and regulatory agencies strategies, the evidence-based use of drugs can be a source of inequality.
After stimulants, antipsychotics are the most prescribed drugs and between 32.3 and 93.2% of all prescriptions are off-label in children and adolescents [ , ]. In Italy, a physician can prescribe drugs off-label if evidence of safety and efficacy exists, no authorized medication is available, and with the patients or parents give informed consent (law 94/98). The Italian Medicine Agency (AIFA) admits reimbursement by the National Health Service (NHS) which is public and universal, despite off-label prescription, for specific drugs and therapeutic indications reported in a list (law 648/96). The inclusion of a drug in this list is decided by an AIFA advisory committee (the one also involved in the approval of marketing authorization) on the basis of the available evidence: clozapine, olanzapine, and quietapine are not licensed for use in children and adolescents but can be reimbursed by the NHS.
In the US, recommendations have been elaborated by scientific societies or and agencies to regulate the off label prescriptions [ , ]. Proper assessment of evidence for off-label use should involve as full and balanced a review as possible [ ]. In the UK, doctors, nurses, and pharmacists may legally prescribe drugs off-label but there is no specific regulation as there is in Italy or the US [ ].
Although physicians can prescribe drugs off-label, the scant availability of certain licensed drugs generates inequalities in access to therapy, since the prescription depends on the attitude and competence of the physician and his/her concern about medico-legal consequences, and therapies may have to be paid for out-of-pocket by parents. However, in some therapeutic areas lacking specific studies for the pediatric population, off-label use is the only therapeutic possibility with documented evidence of efficacy and safety.
Multiple factors can therefore influence off label use, such as different health care systems, drug regulatory agency activities, and professional attitudes.
Pharmaco-epidemiological studies demonstrate the off-label use of several antipsychotics in children [ , , ] in most cases based exclusively on data from randomized controlled trials in adults [ , , ].
We reviewed the registration status, scientific evidence, and recommendations from the guidelines for antipsychotics for psychiatric disorders in children in three high-income countries (Italy, the UK, and the US) with different drug policies and access medication [ ].
Methods
Evaluation of licensing status
Antipsychotics were identified and classified according to the International Anatomic Therapeutical Chemical (ATC) classification system (N05A). A quantitative analysis was done to record the numbers of antipsychotic drugs available for neuropsychiatric disorders and those with a pediatric license in Italy, the UK, and the US. These three countries were selected on the basis of different health systems, regulatory situations, and patterns of psychotropic drug use in the pediatric population (low prevalence in Italy and high prevalence in the US).
The numbers of drugs marketed in all three countries were also considered. The licensing status and Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) were obtained from the following national formularies: Codifa for Italy, Electronic Medicine Compendium for the UK, and Food and Drugs Administration for the US (FDA). The last date of search was June 2018. For the Italian situation, we also examined the list of off-label drugs that can be reimbursed by NHS.
Evaluation of available evidence (reviews and guidelines)
To review the evidence on safety and efficacy of antipsychotics in the pediatric population, we made a bibliographic research for systematic reviews and meta- analyses on antipsychotics in children aged up to 18 years in the MEDLINE, EMBASE, and PsycINFO (from 2015 to May 2018) databases. The Mesh search terms used in our search strategy were child/infant/newborn/adolescent, antipsychotic agents (OR the name of each active substance), limiting to human. To make the search more complete, the terms were searched for in the database dictionaries and through a free text search of the keywords in article titles and abstracts. All references retrieved were then analyzed using the software program Reference Manager V.12. The titles and abstracts were screened independently by two reviewers to assess the relevance of the studies. Contrasting results were reviewed by a third person.
We also searched for guidelines concerning the management of pediatric neuropsychiatry disorders in these databases and on the website of the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE), the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP), the Italian National Health Service (Istituto Superiore di Sanità, ISS), and the Società Italiana di Neuropsichiatria dell’Infanzia e dell’Adolescenza (SINPIA).
Results
The 2018 ATC index reported 67 antipsychotic drugs, respectively 28 (42.0%), 29 (43.2%), and 23 (34.3%) of which were marketed in Italy, the UK and the US (Supplementary Table 1 ). Thirty-seven (60.0%) drugs were marketed in at least one of the countries and 15 (22.3%) in all three. In Italy, 43% had a pediatric license, in the UK 36.0%, and in the US 43.5% (Supplementary Table 1 ). Nineteen antipsychotics were marketed with a pediatric license in at least one country, three of these in all the three countries (paliperidone, aripirazole, and risperidone), but the indications were the same only for paliperidone (with some differences in the licensed age). Aripiprazole is not licensed for irritability associated with autistic disorder and Tourette’s syndrome in children in Italy and the UK, while risperidone is licensed for irritability associated with autistic disorder in children, schizophrenia in adolescents, and bipolar mania only in the US (Table 1 ). Table 1 Therapeutic indications in pediatric populations Drugs Italy UK US Paliperidone • Schizophrenia in adolescents 15 years and older • Schizophrenia in adolescents 15 years and older • Schizophrenia in adolescents 12 years and older Aripiprazole • Manic episodes in bipolar I disorder in adolescents aged 13 years and older • Schizophrenia in adolescents 15 years and older • Manic episodes in bipolar I disorder in adolescents aged 13 years and older • Schizophrenia in adolescents 15 years and older • Bipolar mania—as monotherapy or as an adjunct to lithium or valproate in patients aged 10 years and older • Schizophrenia in adolescents aged 13 years and older • Irritability associated with autistic disorder in children aged 6 years and older • Tourette’s disorder in children aged 6 years and older Risperidone • Short-term symptomatic treatment (up to 6 weeks) of persistent aggression in conduct disorder in children from the age of 5 years and adolescents with subaverage intellectual functioning or mental retardation diagnosed according to DSM-IV criteria, in whom the severity of aggressive or other disruptive behaviors requires pharmacologic treatment • Short-term symptomatic treatment (up to 6 weeks) of persistent aggression in conduct disorder in children from the age of 5 years and adolescents with subaverage intellectual functioning or mental retardation diagnosed according to DSM-IV criteria, in whom the severity of aggressive or other disruptive behaviors requires pharmacologic treatment. • Irritability associated with autistic disorder in children aged 5 years and older • Schizophrenia in adolescents aged 13 years and older • Bipolar mania in patients aged 10 years and older
Wide differences were found in the age groups and diseases for which drugs were licensed. For autism in Italy and the UK, the only antipsychotic authorized was haloperidol in children aged ≥ 6 years old, while in the US, risperidone (≥ 5 years) and aripiprazole (≥ 6 years) were authorized (Table 2 ). Risperidone was licensed for conduct disorders in children aged ≥ 5 years old in Italy and in the UK. No drug was licensed in the US for conduct disorders. For schizophrenia, aripiprazole and paliperidone were licensed with similar age ranges in all three countries. Haloperidol, trifluoperazine, and clorpromazine were licensed in Italy and in the UK and phenothiazine derivatives only in Italy. Aripiprazole was licensed for bipolar disorders in all three countries with wide age ranges (10–13 years). Haloperidol (> 10 years) was licensed for Tourette syndrome in Italy and in the UK, and pimozide (> 12 years) and aripiprazole (> 6 years) in the US. Table 2 Therapeutic indications in pediatric populations stratified by disease Disease Italy UK US Autism Haloperidol ≥ 6 years Haloperidol ≥ 6 years – – – Risperidone ≥ 5 years – – Aripiprazole ≥ 6 years Conduct/behavior disorders Risperidone ≥ 5 years Risperidone ≥ 5 years – Trifluoperazine – – Schizophrenia and psychosis Aripiprazole ≥ 15 years Aripiprazole ≥ 15 years Aripiprazole ≥ 13 years Paliperidone ≥ 15 years Paliperidone ≥ 15 years Paliperidone ≥ 12 years Haloperidol ≥ 13 years Haloperidol ≥ 13 years – Trifluoperazine Trifluoperazine ≥ 6 years – Clorpromazine ≥ 6 years Clorpromazine ≥ 1 years – Quetiapine ≥ 12 years* – Quetiapine ≥ 13 years Olanzapine ≥ 7 years* – Olanzapine ≥ 13 years – Proclorperazine ≥ 12 years Proclorperazine ≥ 2 years Promazine ≥ 12 years Perfenazine ≥ 12 years Periciazine Clozapine ≥ 7 years* – – – Sulpiride ≥ 14 years – – Pimozide ≥ 12 years – – – Lurasidone ≥ 13 years – – Risperidone ≥ 13 years Bipolar disorder Aripiprazole ≥ 13 years Aripiprazole ≥ 13 years Aripiprazole ≥ 10 years Lithium ≥ 12 years – Lithium ≥ 12 years Quetiapine ≥ 12 years* – Quetiapine ≥ 10 years Olanzapine ≥ 7 years* – Olanzapine ≥ 13 years Ziprasidone ≥ 10 years – – – – Asenapine ≥ 10 years – – Lurasidone ≥ 10 years – – Risperidone ≥ 10 years Tourette—disorders related to tic – – Aripiprazole ≥ 6 years – – Pimozide ≥ 12 years Haloperidol ≥ 10 years Haloperidol ≥ 10 years – *Not licensed but included in the list of off-label drugs that can be reimbursed by the Italian NHS
In all, 21 pertinent reviews were retrieved (Table 3 ) [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. They mainly concerned schizophrenia or psychosis (5), and bipolar disorders (4). Eight systematic reviews specifically regarded one drug (6 aripiprazole, 1 paliperidone, and 1 asenapine); 11 reviews included a meta-analysis. Theses concerned schizophrenia and psychosis (4), Tourette’s syndrome and tics (3), conduct disorders (1), autism (2), and bipolar disorders (1). Table 3 Reviews and systematic reviews about medications in pediatric populations stratified by disease Disease Drugs* Review and systematic review Guidelines Autism Aripiprazole, risperidone [ , , , , ] ISS, 2011 AACAP, 2014 NICE, 2013 (CG170) NICE, 2014 (QS51) Conduct/behavior disorders Risperidone, lithium [ , , , , ] Nice, 2013 (CG158) AACAP, 1997 CERT, 2012 TRAAY, 2004 Schizophrenia/psychosis Clozapine, aripiprazole, quetiapine, risperidone, olanzapine, paliperidone, asenapine [ , , , , , , ] Nice, 2013 (CG155) AACAP, 2013 (All antipsychotics - not specified) Bipolar disorders Aripiprazole, lithium, risperidone, asenapine [ , , , , ] Nice, 2014 (CG185) AACAP, 2007 Tourette syndrome and disorders related to TIC Haloperidol, aripiprazole, pimozide, risperidone [ , , , ] ESSTS, 2011 AACAP, 2013 *Drugs for which consensus and/or solid evidence on safety and efficacy exists are reported
Thirteen guidelines for management of neuro-psychiatric disorders in children were found (Supplementary materials section – Guideline ): 4 regarded autism, 3 conduct disorders, 2 psychosis and schizophrenia, 2 Tourette syndrome and tic, 2 maladaptive aggression in youth, and 1 bipolar disorders. Table 3 summarizes the evidence in reviews and guidelines, and which drugs can be considered first choice according to them.
In the US, there was a full agreement between therapeutic indications and available scientific evidence for all diseases except conduct disorders. In Italy and in the UK, agreement exists only for schizophrenia and bipolar disorders, in part for Tourette syndrome and tics but not for autism. For schizophrenia and psychosis and bipolar disorders, therapeutic indications reflect the scientific evidence in all three countries (Tables 2 and 3 ).
Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study comparing the licensing status of antipsychotic drugs in the pediatric population in three countries with current knowledge. Zhu et al. [ ] compared the licensing status in China and in the US and described inconsistencies in the rates of unlicensed and off-label drugs when looking at the different labels: 74% of the antipsychotic prescriptions in China were unlicensed, but this percentage decreased to 22% if US regulatory decisions were applied.
Wide heterogeneity was found in our study too, concerning the national regulatory status for the same antipsychotic drug. Only 37 drugs were licensed in at least one country. This may reflect differences between countries in marketing opportunities for producers, or in the evaluation of available evidence for approval of drug licenses by regulatory authorities.
In all, 19 out of 67 drugs (29%) were licensed for use in children and/or adolescents in at least one country, with Italy having the largest number of antipsychotics (N = 12) prescribable to patients under 18 years old.
The low proportion of pediatric RCTs for antipsychotics is probably due to the fact that most of these drugs were marketed in the 1960s–1970s, when there was no obligation to carry out such studies. A greater number of pediatric RCTs was performed for newer antipsychotics [ , ].
Only three antipsychotics have a pediatric license in all three countries, though for paliperidone the therapeutic indications are similar, but differ in the licensed age. For risperidone and aripiprazole, their different licensed use is at least questionable, considering that both were initially registered in Europe and in the US by the same companies (Janssen for risperidone, and Otsuka Pharmaceutical for aripiprazole). The SPC of Abilify®, approved in Europe with a centralized authorization in 2004, still reports in the version updated at 9 April 2018 unlike the SPC approved in the US and supported by the literature and recognized by international guidelines, that the safety and efficacy of the drug for the treatment of irritability associated with autistic disorder and for tics associated with Tourette’s syndrome in children and adolescents under 18 years have not been established [ , ].
Two potential sources might explain the therapeutic conditions in an American and a European patient: the company was not willing to file a new application to extend the indications as new knowledge was gained, and/or the European Medicines Agency considered the existing evidence not sufficient to approve the new indications to start with and later did not update the work done. For practice and patients’ health right, this is an important point: risperidone and aripiprazole are considered the first choice treatment for irritability in autism spectrum disorders. How and who must guarantee the most appropriate available treatment? Does producers’ will still prevail over the (potential) action of a regulatory agency in the public interest? One example of the consequences of this situation is in Italy, where promazine, perphenazine, and periciazine are licensed for pediatric use in the treatment of psychosis, despite the lack of clinical trials evaluating their efficacy in the pediatric population. In fact, these drugs are not covered in the literature and the guidelines. Periciazine was among the psychotropic drugs most commonly prescribed to school-aged children in Italy, and the second antipsychotic in order of prescriptions [ ], suggesting that in practice the risk of inappropriate (not evidence-based) use is high, not only for antipsychotics [ ] but for many other drugs too in children and adolescents [ ].
In the US, the FDA enacted a series of legislation in the late 1990s and early 2000s requiring pharmaceutical companies to gather efficacy and safety data on any new medications being developed that may at some stage in their life be used in children (0–17 years) and incentivized them to do so [ ]. Following the FDA initiative, the European Commission developed the Pediatric Regulation [ ], which established a system of obligations, rewards, and incentives to ensure that medicines are regularly researched, developed, and authorized to meet the therapeutic needs of children [ ]. Despite this, the licensing status does not yet reflect the evidence on safety and effectiveness of drugs, and this affects children and adolescents’ access to evidence-based therapies. Differences between Europe and the US also remain for antipsychotics marketed after 2007 (e.g., lurasidone and asenapine), however, suggesting that the impact of regulatory measures appears at the moment limited or scant.
Differences in licensing status are not exclusive to the pediatric age but also exist for adults, for example, the use of risperidone is not indicated for aggression in the elderly with Alzheimer’s disease and aripiprazole is also indicated for major depressive disorder and bipolar mania.
A greater risk of adverse events was observed in association with off-label drug use [ ]. It is possible that this is true also for the off-label use of psychotropic drugs.
A specific international formulary of psychotropic drugs for children and adolescents would be a useful response for a more rational prescribing of medicine for children and adolescents that scientific societies, regulatory agencies, and professionals could try to produce [ ].
Looking at the different mental health disorders, only for schizophrenia and bipolar disorders are drugs with evidence of efficacy available in all the three countries, with aripiprazole (schizophrenia and bipolar disorder) and paliperidone (schizophrenia) as shared medications. Systematic reviews on the pharmacological treatment for psychosis did not find differences between antipsychotic drugs in terms of efficacy, with the exception of ziprasidone, which evidence recognized as low quality [ ] and clozapine that was more effective than all the other antipsychotics [ ]. For bipolar disorders, the majority of reviews suggest that aripiprazole was an effective in children and adults at 3 and 12 weeks of follow-up in a controlled experimental setting or in the real-world clinical practice, rarely causing hyperprolactinemia [ , ].
The opposite was true for autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and Tourette syndrome. In the first case, only haloperidol is authorized for use in children with ASD in Italy and the UK. Despite placebo-controlled trials demonstrating its efficacy in reducing symptoms [ , , ], this drug resulted less effective than risperidone in a RCT [ ] and had worse tolerability profile [ ].
The experts from the European Society for the Study of Tourette syndrome who drafted the guidelines in 2011 underlined that the best evidence from randomized clinical trials (RCTs) was available for haloperidol and pimozide, with pimozide probably more effective, with a more favorable adverse reaction profile than haloperidol [ ]. Risperidone, clonidine, aripiprazole, and pimozide were rated as first-choice treatment by the expert group most likely because of better tolerability. In the last few years, several RCTs have been published on the efficacy of aripiprazole in tics and it appears to be promising for children [ ].
More generally, the findings also raise some considerations as to whether guidelines always represent good quality evidence, and whether they are produced according to uniform principles [ , ].
There is evidence that the on-label prescription of haloperidol may expose children to greater risks than the off-label use of other drugs such as aripiprazole or risperidone [ ].
In conclusion, the finding emerging from the present evaluation is that different regulatory processes deny the most appropriate and rational antipsychotic therapy to many children and adolescents: a right to health denied. There is an urgent need for better long-term pharmaco-epidemiological, safety, and efficacy data on off-label prescribing in these groups. To date, there has been a far too narrow focus on short-term trials, with a lack of information on long-term and less frequency, but potentially serious adverse effects [ ]. In pediatric settings, too little attention has been paid to the effects of commonly prescribed psychotropic medications on a child’s development, and too little is known about the safety and effectiveness of common off-label prescribing [ ].
If this can to some extent justify the defensive medicine choices of not prescribing off-label drugs (even with the patients’ or parents’ consent) [ ], it is unacceptable when efficacy and safety evidence is available. Thus, more efforts are needed to update and maintain doctors’ information on drug (and psychotropic) prescribing, conveying the message that the most important issue for the use of a medicine for a specific disease is the evidence based [ ]. A common (at least European) pediatric formulary with evidence-based safety and efficacy information could be useful for improving the rational use of drugs for children and adolescents, harmonizing intercountry drug regulations and availability [ ]. In addition, recommendations from high-quality RCTs and systematic reviews and effective knowledge translation strategies are essential to clinicians and policy makers in planning changes in practice that could ultimately improve patient- and system-related outcomes.