Introduction
Multimorbidity and consequently polypharmacy are highly prevalent in our aging societies [ , , , , ]. Studies have revealed that polypharmacy in older adults is linked to inappropriate drug treatment and has been associated with adverse drug events, e.g. falls, delirium, hypoglycemia, bleeding, hypotension, hospitalization, and even death [ , , , , ]. However, the pharmacotherapy of e.g., major cardiovascular diseases with even more than five drugs can often be beneficial and indispensable. The optimization of drug treatment is challenging as both over- and undertreatment issues may exist simultaneously and the lack of evidence regarding the benefits and risks of many drugs does not readily guide medication use in older people [ , ]. In addition, practitioners in many regions of the world often have little time or incentives by adequate reimbursement for reviewing and optimizing the pharmacotherapy of their older patients [ ].
Thus, the physicians’ obvious need for help to facilitate medication optimization in older people is pressing. One solution to rapidly check the appropriateness of medications in older adults is the creation of medication tools typically combining available evidence with experts’ opinions, especially from geriatricians. One of the favorite approaches is the listing of questions and/or answers addressing those medication issues in older people. In consequence, several lists of drugs-to-avoid (potentially inappropriate medications PIM) and/or necessary drugs (potential prescription omissions PPOs) and criteria, e.g., the Beers list [ ], the START (Screening Tool to Alert Doctors to the Right Treatment)/STOPP (Screening Tool of Older Persons’ Prescriptions) criteria [ ], and the FORTA (Fit fOR The Aged) list [ , , ] have been proposed to aide physicians in this regard.
There are large differences between these tools: some just list structured questions, but give no answers addressing specific therapeutic situations (e.g., the medication appropriateness index MAI [ ]), some list action items such as START [ ]; some just list drugs to avoid such as Beers [ ] and few approaches specifically label drugs for important diseases and their appropriateness such as FORTA [ , , ]. Given the large number of tools with diverse intent, we performed a systematic review of available tools and examined the results from the perspective of the older patient, taking the clinical (outcomes driven) validation of each tool into account; this underpins the fact that the improvement of clinical endpoints (such as adverse drug reactions, falls, or hospitalization) is the ultimate goal of medication optimization [ , , , ].
Methods
This systematic review was performed according to the methodological manuals of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA, http://prisma-statement.org/prismastatement/Checklist.aspx ). The rationale and search strategy were predefined as part of the planning of a doctoral thesis, but no formal protocol or registration established. The PRISMA checklist is available in Supplementary data 1 , and the details of the search strategy in MEDLINE in Supplementary data 2 (Material Search Strategy).
Eligibility criteria
Publications describing listing tools to optimize drug treatment in older people and related updates or developments were included. To qualify as listing approach the tool had to expose at least one list of a minimum of 5 questions and/or 10 items on a list of detailed, specific instructions or criteria including recommendations for treatment by individual drugs. Thus, unstructured or narrative suggestions for improvement of drug therapy in older people were excluded. In addition, we excluded editorials, reviews, and duplicate publications. Updates of tools were recorded as well and linked to the original tool.
Study selection
The search results were exported from PubMed to an Excel file and screened for inclusion according to the eligibility criteria. Subsequently, two reviewers (JK, FP) independently screened the titles and abstracts of the manuscripts to identify relevant publications describing the creation, further development or clinical validation of listing tools to optimize pharmacotherapy in older people. Besides, the reviewers identified and removed duplicates. The database search was completed with a manual search from the reference lists of included articles. If papers referred to tools but were not the original publication describing the development of the tool the original paper describing the tool was identified and included in this review as well. Each paper generating uncertainty regarding inclusion or exclusion criteria was discussed among all of the authors (FP, JK, MW).
Subsequent to the initial search, trials for clinical evaluation were searched (FP, MW) for by the name of the tool and the filter “clinical trial” in PubMed. Only randomized controlled clinical trials (RCT) with a tool-based intervention reporting relevant clinical outcomes (e.g., falls, adverse drug reactions [ADR], pain, hospitalization, mortality) were included.
Data extraction and synthesis
The data were extracted independently by two authors (FP and JK). Subsequently, the first author examined the completeness by reviewing the extraction tables created by the second author and examining the extracted data in the full-text articles. Disagreements were discussed between the two authors and the third author (MW) was consulted if required. The following data were extracted from the selected publications: name of the tool, first author, publication year, PubMed ID (PMID), original publication, country of origin, details regarding the following newly defined (MW) characteristics of the selected tool: DOLA (drug-oriented listing approach); DOLA+ (drug-oriented listing approach but indication required); PILA (patient-in-focus listing approach, details below), type (questionnaire vs. listing approach), validation method (including number of experts per Delphi round), existence of recommendations/information with regard to dosage, alternative drugs, drug-drug interactions and kidney function, targeted clinical setting, number of citations of the original publication in the Web of Science, existence and details about clinical validation trials, and use of a scoring system.
The following definitions for PILA and DOLA(+) were used. PILA = patient-in-focus listing approach, requires intricate knowledge about patients (one needs to know the patient regarding diagnoses, severity, functionality, patient wishes), gives structured answers to questions relating to major diseases, not just the questions (e.g., key questions such as in MAI); gives positive and negative answers DOLA = drug-oriented listing approach, does not necessarily require intricate patient knowledge, or does not give patient-specific answers, mainly or only negative suggestions DOLA+ = as above, but suggestions linked to indications
The data were entered into a Word-file (Microsoft, Redmond, Washington).
Statistical analysis
Since the minimal requirements for the chi-square test were not met ( n > 5), we used the Fisher’s exact test to assess nominal variables with two categories (positive and negative RCT). Statistical significance was assumed at p < 0.05.
Results
A total of 2465 articles were identified in the search (Fig. 1 ). After screening titles and abstracts for inclusion, 119 articles were marked for further evaluation. Besides, we identified 37 additional records by a manual search of the reference lists of the selected full-text papers and reviews that were eligible and no duplicates; one study (RIME) had been reported orally and on the study website [ ]. Fig. 1 PRISMA flow chart of search strategy and abstract screening
Finally, 84 tools were identified meeting the inclusion criteria for this systematic review. Eight tools represented newer versions of previously published tools. Thus, 76 different tools to improve drug treatment in older people were included here. Three were disease-specific tools only addressing dementia and therefore separated from the other 73 tools.
The majority of the tools and their respective further developments are classified as DOLA ( N = 26) or DOLA+ ( N = 38) and, thus, represent tools that could be applied in practice without incorporating patient-specific factors. Only 9 tools were classified as PILA. Over 82.1% of the tools were proposed either in North America or Europe. We found no tools originating from South America. For 43.8% of the tools, the Delphi method was used for validation. In addition, 49.3% of the tools were developed for being used in a specific clinical setting. Further details on the 73 tools (excluding those three addressing dementia only) are provided in Table 1 . Table 1 Numbers, clinical setting targeted (if any), tools tested in randomized controlled clinical trials (RCT) with relevant clinical outcomes and origins of the tools found in this study. DOLA: drug-oriented listing approach; DOLA+: drug-oriented listing approach but indication required; PILA: patient-in-focus listing approach; +: positive impact on clinical outcomes; −: negative or neutral impact on clinical outcomes. Three tools specifically addressing dementia were not included here. *Fisher’s exact test p < 0.05 PILA DOLA DOLA+ Total number 9 26 38 In Europe 6 12 11 In North America 2 12 17 In Asia – – 7 In Australia 1 2 1 In South America – – – In other regions – – 2 Developed for hospitalized patients – 5 6 Developed for nursing home residents – 2 7 Developed for community-dwelling patients 1 10 5 Developed for undetermined or more than one setting 8 9 20 Delphi method used to develop the tool 5 10 17 Scoring system included 1 5 4 RCT with relevant clinical outcomes (e.g., ADRs, falls, hospitalization, mortality or pain) excluding those for multiple tool testing 4+/1− 0 0+/5− * All RCT with relevant clinical outcomes (e.g., ADRs, falls, hospitalization, mortality, or pain) 4+/1− 0 1+/7−*
Only 12 tools have been clinically evaluated in RCT reporting clinical endpoints (relevant geriatric endpoints such as adverse drug reactions, falls, delirium, hospitalization, death; as stated in Supplementary data 3 ); of those, only 5 found a significantly positive impact on at least one clinical endpoint, 8 had no positive impact on clinical endpoints and were thus termed negative trials. One RCT was entered with both a positive and a negative result, depending on the clinical settings separated for in- or outpatients [ ]. The number of patients ranged from 55 to 1318 (median 404.5), mean duration of treatment was 6 months. Eight trials had a Jadad-score of 1 or 2, only one had 5 [ ]. Strikingly, the number of positive trials was 4 over only one negative study for PILA while for DOLA and DOLA+ the number of negative results was 7 comparing to only 1 positive study outcome. If those approaches combining two or more tools (e.g., Beers and MAI) were excluded, PILA generated 4 over 1, DOLA(+) 0 over 5 positive vs negative results. Fisher’s exact test on these numbers, albeit small, showed a significant difference in favor of PILA, both for all RCT and RCT excluding those testing multiple tools ( p < 0.05).
Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 (Supplementary data 4 ) depict the 76 criteria/tools (including 8 updates/developments from former versions) found in our study and their respective characteristics
Twenty tools compile questionnaire items only (lists of questions), but give no specific recommendations (answers) for clinical situations, e.g., by specifying drugs to be preferably used to treat high blood pressure. Forty-three tools provide information on drug-drug-interactions, 46 on dosing, 28 on kidney function, and 27 on alternative drugs. The START/STOPP criteria have the highest number of citations (597), followed by the Beers list (591).
Discussion
Listing approaches supporting doctors and pharmacists to optimize drug prescribing for older patients date back to the early 1990s [ ]. Popular early approaches were questionnaires (e.g., MAI) or negative lists of PIMs (e.g., Beers) latter aiming at reducing overtreatment by suboptimal drugs. Despite very few early attempts to address undertreatment issues as well (PPOs, [ ]) the combined handling of over- and undertreatment issues became more popular only about a decade ago, with START/STOPP and FORTA appearing almost simultaneously. Meanwhile there is an abundance of listing approaches, some have persisted as detectable by large and still increasing citation numbers and some have not elicited a long-lasting response in the scientific community.
The key issue of accepting such tools however has attracted wider attention only lately: even if a PIM-list is easy to apply as it only requires knowledge of the drugs of a given patient, but not of the patient itself, its clinical impact seems to be limited as shown in the aforementioned RCTs. This did not come as a surprise as optimal drug treatment has to be an approach of tailoring to individual patient’s needs that may be very diverse in view of the sheer number of disease-combinations and features of organ failure at high age [ , ].
The abundance and lack of orientation regarding the various listing tools has probably led to undervaluing the potential of this approach. In two recent reviews, 36 [ ] or 42 [ ] tools were identified. The present systematic review aimed at a more comprehensive compilation of listing approaches: it includes all listing approaches even if restricted to a questionnaire-type shortlist of questions. The medication appropriateness index (MAI, [ ]) is missing in the review by Motter et al. [ ] though certainly influential as being used in conjunction with other listing approaches (e.g., Beers) and frequently cited.
The lower number in the review by Masnoon et al. [ ] may reflect the limited time range (2000–2016), though MAI was included despite its publication in 1992. They report about validation trials for about 50% of these tools. However, these mainly represent association studies (cohort or case-control studies), only 2 RCT were identified, VALFORTA [ ] was misclassified as case-control trial. As association studies may not prove the causal relation between tool and outcome we decided not to include such studies. On the other hand, RCT may have limitations, and most RCT identified here had low Jadad-scores indicating weaknesses in terms of e.g., blinding or randomization.
So far, listing tools have been classified into two major groups: implicit tools (simply defined as judgment-based) and explicit tools (criterion-based). Though principally pointing to the presence or absence of need for patient data the use and definition of this classification has been unsatisfactory and sometimes even contradictory. The authors of START/STOPP stipulated their approach as “explicit” [ ] though its application certainly requires intricate knowledge about the patient. Masnoon et al. [ ] qualify both START/STOPP and FORTA as explicit (criteria-based). However, these criteria or drug proposals cannot be used without knowing medical details about the patient. This is probably the most important discriminatory feature that is not unanimously reflected in the use of the terms “implicit” and “explicit”.
The aim of this systematic review was both to detect and characterize all available tools developed to optimize drug treatment in geriatric patients and to label them according to a new classification (proposed by MW): drug-oriented listing approach (DOLA), drug-oriented listing approach but indication required (DOLA+) and patient-in-focus listing approach (PILA). A PILA must include positive as well as negative recommendations for the most relevant conditions/diseases in older people. This very basic separation deemed necessary as only PILA cover major accepted standards of clinical practice, namely, to individualize therapy to be able to meet the requirements of a given patient (s.o.). Thus, this new categorization was developed to support a rapid orientation about a listing tool regarding its proximity to the preferred patient-centered medication process; it clearly aims at promoting PILA as the more comprehensive and clinically meaningful approaches.
One key outcome of this review is the demonstration of a wide gap of clinical validation for these tools by RCT on relevant clinical endpoints being available for only less than 20% of the tools. Interestingly, the questionnaire-type tools had no standing alone validation trials. RCT with positive interventional outcomes are reported for only 7% of the tools. The significantly higher number of positive RCT for PILA compared to DOLA(+) is in line with the preference of PILA as the better approach to cover major clinical demands. The largely negative RCT for DOLA(+) are in contrast with the overall positive findings for association studies [ ]; this may reflect the conceptual limitations of association studies as exemplified by the association between the numbers of storks and birth rates [ ].
The RCT identified in this review are too heterogeneous regarding the type and measurement of mostly secondary, thus descriptive clinical variables and too small in numbers to allow for a meaningful meta-analysis; therefore, the counting of trials with positive or negative outcomes is probably the best way of comparing them at present. The analysis also revealed that even in “positive” trials many clinical measures remained unchanged and, thus, the impact of the tool even in these trials was restricted to one or few parameters. We chose the possibly lowest threshold to claim “positivity” of an RCT, namely, the significant (not necessarily clinically relevant) impact on at least one outcome parameter. Any increase of this threshold e.g., by defining clinical relevance by a minimum extent of the effect or requiring more than one significant effect would have lowered the number of “positive” trials further.
The impact of tools may be also limited as they only address particular areas of the complex process of drug prescribing, e.g., providing drug names only, not reflecting the need for dose adjustments, interactions etc. Thus, the combination of complementary tools such as MAI plus a listing tool may be desirable, and two trials [ , ] have employed this strategy.
Limitations
This systematic review was restricted to MEDLINE and by some terms e.g., language, and may have missed items. The restriction to one database may have excluded instruments in other databases, but as a large share of instruments had multiple citations the likelihood of missing relevant, influential tools with only one entry (or even abstract only) was considered to be low. In addition, our search detected almost twice as many instruments compared to the recent review by Motter et al. [ ]. “Gray” literature search was restricted to secondary entries (e.g., from reviews identified by the primary search) and may have been incomplete as well.
The definition of PILA and DOLA was driven by clinical aspects; the separation of tools into these categories was based on non-validated categorical criteria.
The arbitrary cutoffs for qualifying as “tool” of at least 5 questions and/or at least 10 items are proposed by the authors as these figures are considered as minimal requirements for meaningful guidance of medication; however other, possibly higher cutoffs could be debated and would affect the eligibility of tools.
The definition of “positive” and “negative” trials was restricted to a minimum of at least one positive outcome (e.g., the occurrence of adverse drug reactions was reduced); its overall clinical relevance was not interpreted, and the clinical impact of listing tools may be even smaller than suggested by the simple criteria for RCT “positivity” used here. Quantitative compilations of readouts (meta-analysis) were not performed as the parameters were diverse and often not comparable, and the simplistic statistical comparison of counting positive vs negative trials may not be appropriate.
The confinement of validation studies to RCT may have led to inadequate reflection of other sources of evidence, e.g., from case-control or cohort studies.
Conclusions
Listing tools may be clinically useful to optimize medications and address issues of multimorbidity and related polypharmacy in older patients. Tools that require intricate knowledge about the patient for their proper application are preferable as a positive clinical impact is measurable in the majority of related randomized controlled clinical trials. This is not the case for trials on tools that are applicable without intricate knowledge on patients. However, the clinical evaluation of these tools, the best way of implementing them requires much more research mainly addressing the lack of high quality clinical trials.