Introduction
The intact nephron hypothesis (INH) is a widely accepted model for renal impairment. Under the INH, the smallest functional unit of the kidney is the nephron, and each nephron is either fully functional (intact) or non-functional (lost) [ ]. Renal impairment occurs when there is a progressive loss of intact nephrons and when compensatory mechanisms within the residual nephrons can no longer maintain homeostasis [ ]. In practical terms, this suggests that significant damage to any region of the nephron results in a total loss of that nephron.
The kidneys are major drug-eliminating organs, responsible for the clearance of many commonly used drugs and their metabolites. Administration of renally cleared drugs at normal doses to patients with kidney dysfunction can result in accumulation and an increased risk of toxicity. Therefore, it is generally recommended that for drugs where renal clearance accounts 30% or more of the total drug clearance, a dose reduction should be considered for patients with kidney dysfunction [ ].
Renal drug handling involves three processes in the nephron: glomerular filtration, tubular secretion and tubular reabsorption. The total renal clearance is therefore be given by: $$ {CL}_{\mathrm{R},\mathrm{drug}}=\left( fu\times GFR\right)+{CL}_{\mathrm{secretion}}+\left(-{CL}_{\mathrm{reabsorption}}\right) $$ where CL R, drug is the renal clearance of the drug, fu is the fraction unbound in the plasma, GFR is the glomerular filtration rate, CL secretion is the tubular clearance and CL reabsorption is the tubular reabsorption. Under the INH, all three of these processes are assumed to decline at a rate proportional to each other in the setting of renal dysfunction. Therefore, for drugs with linear pharmacokinetics, dose adjustment in renal impairment will usually be based on the assumption that renal clearance, and hence the maintenance dose rate, is a linear function of GFR. Under this model, tubular processes are ignored.
The simple notion that a linear relationship exists between renal drug clearance and GFR has not been consistently demonstrated in the literature. Much of the evidence generated from renal drug studies, where clearance and GFR are often regressed to show linearity, use creatinine clearance to estimate GFR. Creatinine, itself, undergoes tubular secretion, an elimination pathway that becomes more important as renal function declines [ ], which would be expected to confound the true relationship between drug clearance and GFR. In addition, recent evidence from our research group [ , ], and other works [ , , ], suggest that GFR may not correlate with changes in renal drug handling, particularly for drugs that undergo extensive tubular secretion.
To date, the evidence-base to support the INH as a model for renal drug handling has not been reviewed. The aims of this study were (1) to systematically review published studies designed to test the INH and (2) to evaluate the study designs employed quantitatively and qualitatively using a bespoke strength of evidence score.
Methods
Literature search
A comprehensive literature search was conducted in MEDLINE (Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1946 to Present with Daily Update; 1946-May 2017), EMBASE (EMBASE Classic+EMABSE; 1947-May 2017) and Google Scholar (1947-May 2017). Two search strategies were employed: a ‘static’ search and a learning-based approach [ ]. The ‘static’ search was conducted in MEDLINE and EMBASE using MeSH terms “chronic disease”, “glomerulonephritis”, “nephritis”, “nephron” (in MEDLINE); “biological model”, “glomerulonephritis”, “kidney”, “nomenclature”, “pathophysiology” (in EMBASE) and keywords “intact nephron hypothesis” and “whole nephron hypothesis”. The details of the learning-based approach have been published elsewhere [ ]. In brief, it involved an iterative process where relevant MeSH terms were extracted from an index study (in this case, Bricker et al. [ ]) and searched. The studies found in the first iteration of the search were then mined for additional MeSH terms and the process repeated until no new unique MeSH term was identified. The MeSH terms identified and number of studies found in the learning-based approach are summarised in Online Resource 1 . Relevant review papers were mined for additional studies. A citation search was also conducted in Google Scholar to identify publications including a citation for the index article by Bricker et al. [ ].
Study selection criteria
Studies were included if they were (1) published in a peer-review journal and (2) compared relative changes in glomerular and tubular function across different levels of renal function in human studies, animal models or ex vivo . Studies were excluded if they (1) were published in a language other than English, (2) were not related to the INH or (3) did not include data suitable for extraction. Review papers, textbooks and commentaries were also excluded. The studies were initially screened for inclusion/exclusion based on the title and abstract. The remaining studies were subjected to a full text review and further assessed for eligibility.
We included only studies that were specifically designed to understand the relationship between glomerular and tubular function. Renal pharmacokinetic studies designed to inform drug dosing in renal dysfunction were not included in this review.
Screening and study selection were initially conducted by one author (S.P.). The excluded studies were reviewed by another author (D.F.B.W.) as a quality assurance procedure. Any discrepancies were resolved by a third author (S.B.D.).
Data extraction
The following information was extracted from each study: (1) support (or not) for the INH (see definitions below), (2) the method used to estimate or measure GFR including the GFR marker, (3) details of the probes used to measure tubular function, (4) the number of human subjects or animals included in the study and (5) the range of GFR values studied. For (4) and (5), either individual or summary data were extracted (graphical data were digitally extracted using WebPlotDigitizer [ ]).
Studies were deemed to support the INH when their analysis failed to reject their null hypothesis (that all processes evaluated were affected to the same extent). Studies were deemed to have rejected the INH if their analysis yielded a p value of less than their pre-defined alpha-error value (assumed to be 0.05 if not provided).
Bespoke strength of evidence score
We developed a bespoke strength of evidence score to assess elements of the study designs used in the published literature. The score could range from − 2 to 8. Details of the scoring system are summarised in Online Resource 2 .
The score evaluated four study designs features: (1) measurement of GFR, (2) measurement of tubular function, (3) sample size and (4) GFR range. Each of these is discussed in turn below.
Measurement of GFR
For the purpose of this review, we defined eGFR as an estimated glomerular filtration rate determined using a creatinine or cystatin C-based equation such as the Cockcroft-Gault equation [ ], the MDRD equation [ ] or the CKD-EPI equation [ ]. We defined mGFR as either: (1) a pharmacokinetic experiment involving the administration of an exogenous marker for glomerular filtration (e.g. a radioisotope, inulin, sinistrin) or (2) a pharmacokinetic experiment using an endogenous marker for glomerular filtration (e.g. creatinine) where renal clearance is determined using urinary excretion data (e.g. 24-h urine collection). In the strength of evidence score, we deemed eGFR to be less accurate than mGFR [ ] and weighted the scores accordingly (see Online Resource 2 ). The studies which measured creatinine clearance using 24-h urine data were assigned a lower score than those using exogenous markers. This was to account for the possible confounding effects of tubular creatinine handling [ ].
Measurement of tubular function
A higher weighting was assigned to those studies that used multiple probes to assess tubular function, for example, if they included probes for both cationic and anionic secretory processes. Para-aminohippurate (PAH) is a commonly used probe in renal handling studies [ ]. It can be used at different doses to assess renal blood flow (low-dose protocol) or at higher doses to assess tubular function (high-dose protocol). We assumed that both protocols would provide a reasonable measure of tubular function and were weighted equally.
Sample size
The maximum score was assigned for human studies that included n ≥ 30 participants. This was based on the European Medicines Agency guidance for phase I pharmacokinetic studies in renal patients [ ]. For animal studies, the maximum score for sample size was assigned if the study included n ≥ 8 animals. This was based on the assumption that the between-subject variability in pharmacokinetic parameters for various animal species (e.g. dogs, rats) is typically lower than that in humans. For example, the between-subject variability(quantified as the coefficient of variation (CV%)) for clearance has been found to be 9% for dogs [ ] and 12% for rats [ ] compared to humans, which is typically about 40% [ ]. For the purpose of this analysis, we have conservatively assumed that between-subject variability in animals is about half of that in humans. The sample size required would therefore be four times less than that required for human studies. Studies with a sample size that were less than the designated sample size cut-off for humans and animals were given a null score.
GFR range
For studies in humans, renal function was divided into three categories based on the Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes guideline (which recommends CKD-EPI equation [ ]) for chronic kidney disease (CKD) [ ]: Group I: eGFR category G1 and G2 (≥ 60 ml/min/1.73 m 2 ), Group II: eGFR category G3a and G3b (30–59 ml/min/1.73 m 2 ), and Group III: eGFR category G4 and G5 (≤ 29 ml/min/1.73 m 2 ; patients on renal replacement therapy or transplantation were excluded)
For studies where eGFR was not estimated using the CKD-EPI equation [ ], as required by the eGFR categories outlined above, any estimate of GFR (eGFR or mGFR) reported in the study was used for the purposes of allocation to GFR groups. Summary GFR estimates were extracted verbatim regardless of body size normalisation (e.g. normalised to 1.73 m 2 body surface area (BSA) or body weight). Where individual level data were reported, such as GFR estimates, weight or BSA, the GFR values were normalised to body size (BSA for humans; body weight for animals) before allocation to the renal function groups. For studies in animals, mGFR was the only GFR estimate reported. This was grouped based on the usual classification of renal impairment for each animal species from published studies [ , , ].
The allocation of eGFR to each CKD group was determined for humans relative to the normal adult human GFR of about 120 ml/min/1.73 m 2 . For example, for humans, group I included GFR ≥ 60 ml/min/1.73 m 2 , which is 50% of the normal adult human GFR. Similarly, for rats and dogs, group I included ≥ 5 ml/min/kg and 1 ml/min/kg, respectively, which is 50% of the normal adult rat and dog GFR, i.e. 10 ml/min/kg [ , ] and 2 ml/min/kg [ ], respectively.
We assumed that studies with an even distribution of subjects within each renal function group, or that included subjects at the extremes of renal function (groups I and III), constituted a strong study design. In addition, the scoring accounted for studies that used only the plasma concentrations of probes versus those that measured both plasma and urine concentrations (the latter was assumed to provide a more robust and unbiased method for determining GFR or tubular clearance than the former). The details are as follows; In studies where GFR was measured using only the plasma concentrations of a probe, a higher weighting was assigned if GFR measurements were equally distributed over all three groups and at least 25% of the data were in groups I and 25% in group III. For those studies where GFR was measured using both plasma and urine probe data, a higher weighting was assigned if GFR measurements included groups I and III, and at least 25% of the data in group I and 25% in group III.
Data analysis
The median strength of evidence score for each of the four study design components (GFR, tubular processes, sample size and GFR range) as well as for the total score was determined for the group of studies that supported the INH and for those that did not. The total bespoke strength of evidence score and the four individual components were separately compared between the groups. This was done using a non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test ( p = 0.05 two-tailed, for significance) implemented in R (v3.4.0, The R Foundation).
Results
A total of 2996 studies were identified. After removing duplicates, the titles and abstracts of the remaining 2878 studies were screened for inclusion/exclusion criteria. The following papers were excluded; n = 53 were not in English, n = 3 appeared in non peer-reviewed journals, n = 421 were review papers, textbooks or commentaries, and n = 2141 did not present research assessing the relationship between glomerular and tubular function. The remaining 229 studies were subjected to a full text review and further assessed for eligibility. Of these, n = 165 were found to present research unrelated to the INH and n = 34 did not present data suitable for extraction. The remaining 30 studies constituted the final analysis dataset and were subjected to data extraction. A flow diagram of the study identification process is presented in Fig. 1 . Most of the eligible studies involved animal models ( n = 19) [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. Ten studies involved human subjects with different levels of kidney function [ , , , , , , , , , ]. One study explored the INH using a mathematical model [ ]. It was not possible to define a summary effect size for the studies; therefore, a meta-analysis was not performed. Fig. 1 Flow diagram for the identification of studies assessing the intact nephron hypothesis. * ‘Other approaches’ includes mining of relevant articles for citations and citation search for the seminal study by Bricker et al. [ ]
Studies that support the intact nephron hypothesis
Of the 30 studies reviewed, six supported the INH [ , , , , , ]. A summary of the studies is presented in Table 1 . Five studies involved animal models [ , , , , ] and one involved human subjects [ ]. In the animal studies, kidney dysfunction was induced experimentally either by injecting nephrotoxic substances, anti-kidney serum or pathogenic bacteria into the kidney tissue or by partial or complete nephrectomy [ , , , , ]. Studies reported mGFR measures using inulin [ , ], creatinine [ , ] or both [ , ] as marker of GFR. All of the studies used PAH as marker to assess tubular function. Table 1 Summary of studies supporting the intact nephron hypothesis Study [reference] Population ( n ) Renal failure model GFR measure Tubular function measure Key observations Bricker et al. 1960 [ ] Dogs (3) Aminonucleoside nephritis, anti-kidney serum glomerulonephritis, pyelonephritis Measured CL Cr or CL In Measured ERPF Comparable ratios of GFR and ERPF, and GFR and Tm PAH in intact and diseased kidney irrespective of the underlying renal disease. Bricker et al. 1964 [ ] Mongrel dogs, female (26) Unilateral pyelonephritis, unilateral ureteral ligation, unilateral nephrectomy Measured CL Cr(ex) Measured CL PAH Similar increase in CL Cr(ex) (69.8%) and CL PAH (66.5%) in pyelonephritic kidney after removal of intact kidney. Dontas et al. 1972 [ ] Human (55) Upper urinary tract infection Measured CL Cr or CL In Measured Tm PAH Change in Tm PAH occurs in parallel with similar changes in GFR, so that Tm PAH /CL In ratios remain constant. Wagnild et al. 1974 [ ] Mongrel dogs (10) Nephrotixic serum (Masugi) Measured CL Cr(ex) Measured CL PAH and Tm PAH CL Cr(ex) /CL PAH for intact (0.25) and disease (0.31) kidneys ( p < 0.05); Tm PAH /GFR for intact (18.9 mg per 100 ml) and disease (19.7 mg per 100 ml) kidneys; both were nearly equal. Haberle et al. 1975 [ ] Wistar rats, male (13) Isotonic Ringer’s solution perfusion Measured CL In Measured T PAH Parallel relationship between CL PAH by single proximal convolution and CL In by single nephron as well as those by the whole kidney. Haberle et al. 1978 [ ] Sprague-Dawley or Wistar albino rats (69) NA Measured CL In Measured T PAH Under unsaturated PAH transport system, a parallel decrease in CL PAH and CL In . CL Cr creatinine clearance, CL Cr(ex) exogenous creatinine clearance, CL PAH PAH clearance, ERPF effective renal plasma flow, n number of subjects, T PAH renal tubular PAH secretion rate, Tm PAH maximum renal tubular PAH secretion rate
Studies that do not support the intact nephron hypothesis
Twenty-four of 30 studies did not support the INH [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. The details of these studies are summarised in Table 2 . Overall, nine studies involved human subjects, 17 reported a measured glomerular filtration rate, i.e. mGFR measured using an exogenous probe such as inulin, 51 Cr EDTA or sinistrin. Eleven studies reported the clearance of multiple probes for tubular function. Only one of the studies performed an a priori power analysis, where a sample size of n = 6, in each of the three groups, was estimated to detect a 50% reduction in renal clearance with 70 to 80% power [ ]. Table 2 Summary of studies not supporting the intact nephron hypothesis Study [reference] Population ( n ) Renal failure model GFR measure Tubular function measure Key observations Rieselbach et al. 1964 [ ] Mongrel dogs, female (5) Stage I: normal kidneys; Stage II: induced experimental pyelonephritis in 1 of the kidneys; Stage III: surgically removed normal kidney Measured CL Cr(ex) Measured Tm PAH Marked increase in Tm PAH , such that the Tm PAH /GFR ratio in the diseased kidney was doubled after removal of the control kidney. Morrison et al. 1966 [ ] Rats (18) Partial nephrectomy Measured CL In Measured CL PAH Progressive impairment of glomerular filtration unattended by a parallel change in tubular function was observed. Biber et al. 1968 [ ] Wistar rats, male (47) ARF induced by potassium dichromate and mercuric chloride Measured CL In Measured CL PAH and CL Urea Glomerular function did not fall in parallel with the decline in tubular function. Kramp et al. 1974 [ ] Wistar rats, male (39) Renal failure induced by potassium dichromate and mercuric chloride CL 14C-In Measured Tm PAH The Tm PAH /GFR ratio was increased above normal indicating a shift toward functional tubular predominance. Olesen et al. 1975 [ ] Mongrel dogs, female (8) Unilateral nephrectomy Measured CL Cr(ex) Measured CL PAH and Tm PAH Tm PAH /CL Cr(ex) showed a downward trend throughout the study. Wagnild et al. 1976 [ ] Mongrel dogs, female (20) Acute proliferative glomerulonephritis; acute pyelonephritis Measured CL Cr(ex) Measured CL PAH and Tm PAH CL Cr(ex) /CL PAH decreased significantly in dogs with renal failure; Tm PAH /CL Cr(ex) was greater in dogs with renal failure. Kampf et al. 1981 [ ] Human (44) Stable chronic renal insufficiency Measured CL In and CL Cr(ex) Measured CL PAH and cefoxitin total body clearance Percentage difference between the measured total body clearance of cefoxitin and that calculated by CL PAH , CL Cr(ex) and CL In amounted to 26%, 35% and 46%, respectively. Rakhit et al. 1988 [ ] Human (15) Mild to moderate renal insufficiency Measured CL 3H-In Measured CL PAH , pentopril and its active metabolite CL R Renal secretion of pentopril and its active metabolite were correlated with CL PAH ; hyperbolic relationship between CL Cr and CL PAH was observed. Lin et al. 1988 [ ] Human (36) Mild to severe renal insufficiency Measured CL Cr Measured famotidine CL R Decrease in famotidine tubular secretion in renal insufficiency was much greater than GFR compared to healthy volunteers. Lin et al. 1988 [ ] Sprague-Dawley rats (156) ARF induced by uranyl nitrate or glycerol Measured CL 3H-In or CL 12C-In Measured CL PAH or CL TEAB Non-parallel decline of CL PAH and CL TEAB compared to CL IN in uranyl nitrate ARF. Gloff et al. 1989 [ ] Rats (23) Renal failure induced by uranyl nitrate Measured CL In Measured CL PAH Decrease in CL PAH by 42% without change in CL In observed at low dose (0.3 mg kg-1). Maiza et al. 1990 [ ] Sprague-Dawley rats (NA) Renal failure induced by cisplatin, BEA, aurothimalate and antiserum Measured CL In Measured CL PAH , CL NMN , cimetidine, lithium, and cephalexin CL R Non-parallel decline in CL In and CL NMN was observed in different renal failure models. For drugs that are handled by renal tubules, CL NMN predicted CL R better than CL In . Maiza et al. 1991 [ ] Sprague-Dawley rats (37) (Same as in Maiza et al. 1990) Measured CL In Measured CL PAH , CL NMN and cimetidine CL R A non-parallel decline in CL In and CL NMN was observed in different renal failure models. CL NMN was better predictor of CL R of cimetidine than CL In . Maiza et al. 1993 [ ] Sprague-Dawley rats (35) (Same as in Maiza et al. 1990) Measured CL In Measured CL NMN and cephalexin CL R A non-parallel decline in CL In and CL NMN was observed in different renal failure models. CL NMN was better predictor of CL R of cephalexin than CL In . Janku 1993 [ ] Simulated (NA) NA Simulated Simulated CL R of a drug that is eliminated via renal secretion has negligible reabsorption and moderate plasma binding has nonlinear relation with GFR. Janku et al. 1993 [ ] Human (34) Various renal disease Measured CL In , CL Cr and kanamycin CL R Measured CL PAH A significant improvement in goodness of fit was obtained for CL PAH data when non-linear relationship between CL R of the compound and GFR was used. Paap et al. 1993 [ ] Human (10) Various extrinsic and intrinsic renal diseases Measured CL Cr Measured cefotaxime and desacetylcefotaxime CL R Greater loss of tubular function as well as back leak reabsorption was anticipated in extrinsic renal disease compared to intrinsic renal disease. Shi et al. 1996 [ ] Human (18) Mild to severe renal insufficiency Measured CL Cr(ex) , CL Cr and CL In Measured CL PAH and sematilide CL R The relationship between CL R of sematilide and CL In and CL PAH is described by nonlinear function. Nakamura et al. 1997 [ ] Wistar albino rats, male (12) ARF induced by uranyl nitrate or cisplatin Measured CL In Measured vancomycin CL R The decrease in secretory CL R of vancomycin was more pronounced than that in CL In . He et al. 2001 [ ] Wistar rats, male (NA) ARF induced by BEA, neomycin, uranyl nitrate or ischemia Measured CL In Measured CL NMN and NAPA CL R CL R of NAPA/CL In was significantly reduced in rats with ARF; CL R of NAPA was better predicted by CL NMN compared to CL In . Savant et al. 2001 [ ] Sprague-Dawley rats (25) Young rats (1 month) to aged rats (16 month) kidney in recirculating perfused system Measured CL Cr Measured CL PAH Nonlinear relationship was observed between CL PAH and CL Cr . Ilic et al. 2001 [ ] Human (71) ARF, CRF Measured CL 99mTc-DTPA Measured CL 131I-OIH Non parallel change in CL 99mTC-DTPA and CL 131I-OIH in advanced stage CRF and oligoanuric ARF patient compared to healthy volunteers. Udy et al. 2014 [ ] Human (32) Augmented renal clearance in critically ill ICU patients Measured CL Cr and sinistrin CL Measured CL PAH , (S)-pindolol and (R)-pindolol CL R ; fluconazole reabsorption CL Cr , Sinistrin CL, CL PAH and fluconazole reabsorption were elevated in patients while (S)-pindolol and (R)-pindolol CL R were reduced. Putt et al. 2014 [ ] Human (40) Mild to severe renal insufficiency Measured CL 51Cr EDTA Measured CL Urate , (S)-pindolol and (R)-pindolol CL R ; fluconazole reabsorption Change in CL 51Cr EDTA was parallel to change in CL Urate as well as fluconazole reabsorption but it did not correlate with change in (S)-pindolol and (R)-pindolol CL R . ARF acute renal failure, BEA 2-bromoethylamine hydrobromide, CL Cr creatinine clearance, CL Cr(ex) exogenous creatinine clearance, CL PAH PAH clearance, CL Urea urea clearance, CL R renal clearance, CL 3H-In 3H-inulin clearance, CL 12C-In 12C-inulin clearance, CL TEAB tetraethylammonium bromide clearance, CL NMN N-1-methylnicotinamide, CRF chronic renal failure, CL 131I-OIH iodine-131 sodium o-iodohippurate clearance, ICU intensive care unit, n number of subjects, NAPA N-acetyl procainamide, Tm PAH maximum renal tubular PAH secretion rate
Strength of evidence score
The strength of evidence score is summarised in Online Resource 3 . The overall median scores of the studies supporting and not supporting the INH were 3 and 4, respectively ( p = 0.13 two-tailed, Mann-Whitney U test). In the analysis of each component, where scores were compared between the INH and non-INH supporting studies, a significant difference was found in the scores for the measurement of tubular function ( p = 0.04 two-tailed, Mann-Whitney U test), with a higher score for the studies that did not support the INH than the studies that supported the INH. No other component of the score (method for measuring GFR, sample size or GFR range) was found to be significantly different between the groups.
Discussion
In this study, we report a systematic review of published studies designed to explore the INH. The evidence to support the INH arose from six studies [ , , , , , ] while 24 studies were found to support a non-linear relationship between GFR and tubular function [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. We propose that this result, in itself, suggests that the INH may not be a suitable general model for renal drug handling. Of the six studies supporting the INH, five involved animal models with artificially induced renal dysfunction. It is noteworthy that much of this early work has been questioned because the surgical techniques used to induce renal damage may not have been optimal or because the high doses of nephrotoxins administered would not allow selective damage to specific areas of the nephron to be discerned [ ].
Overall, there was no statistical difference in the strength of evidence score between studies supporting or not supporting the INH. The score for the measurement of tubular function was significantly higher for the studies that did not support the INH than the studies that supported the INH although both groups had a median score equal to 1. This is because the Mann-Whitney U test tests the whole distribution, which cannot be characterised by a single measure of central tendency. The studies that did not support the INH had a greater probability of accurately assessing tubular function since they used multiple probes ( n = 11). For example, Putt et al. simultaneously administered a cocktail of probes, 51 Cr EDTA, fluconazole, S-pindolol and urate to assess GFR, proximal tubular reabsorption, cationic tubular secretion and anionic tubular secretion, respectively. Additionally, there was a wider range of measured GFR in studies that did not support the INH [ , , , , , , , , ] compared to a single study that supported the hypothesis [ ]. Both of these factors are important for establishing the nature of the relationship between glomerular function and tubular function in the kidney.
The studies that did not support the INH were predominately published after 1980. It is conceivable that techniques for creating animal models for renal failure have become more refined. If so, then more recent studies are more likely to capture the discordance between GFR and tubular function than the earlier work. One interpretation is that the studies published since 1980 that did not support the INH might have been better designed to access the relationship between GFR and tubular function. It is important to note that there are no reports of study designs that have been optimised to test the INH and hence we cannot be certain which design features are most critical.
Our study suggests that the INH may not provide a general model for renal drug handling, a finding that aligns with other results in the literature. Wright and Duffull [ ] fitted a model to published animal data with experimentally induced renal dysfunction and found a non-linear relationship between the clearance of tubular function probes and GFR. Similarly, Chapron et al. evaluated commonly used eGFR and mGFR methods to predict the renal clearance of 27 drugs in patients with mild to severe stages of chronic kidney disease [ ]. The authors found that the renal clearance of nearly half of the tested drugs (mainly eliminated by tubular secretion) could not be predicted accurately with either GFR estimation methods. Hsueh et al. [ ] developed a physiologically based pharmacokinetic models for seven renally cleared organic anion transporter substrates and found that transporter capacity in the renal tubules needed to be accounted for in renally impaired patients to accurately predict renal clearance. Hsueh et al. suggested that the INH is sufficient to predict the renal clearance of drugs for mild or moderate chronic kidney disease patients but not for those with severe renal impairment.
Current clinical practice appears agnostic to the INH with respect to dose adjustment of renally cleared drugs in patients with concurrent renal dysfunction. This results in the wide application of parsimonious principles of drug dosing, in that whatever measure is used to determine diagnostic categories of renal impairment (e.g. GFR) is also used to adjust the dose rate of renally cleared drugs. This implicitly follows the INH. The, unwritten, assumptions underpinning this practice can be summarised as follows: 1. Assumption 1: \( \frac{dGFR}{dt}\propto \frac{dC{L}_{secretion}}{dt}\propto \frac{dC{L}_{reabsorption}}{dt} \) 2. Assumption 2: Renal drug clearance ∝ GFR 3. Assumption 3: eGFR ≈ GFR 4. Axiom: Maintenance dose rate ∝ Renal drug clearance 5. Therefore: Maintenance dose rate ∝ eGFR
Under these assumptions, current clinical practice considers that the rate of change in all functional components of a nephron (represented here as derivative of GFR, tubular secretion and tubular reabsorption with respect to time) is always proportional (assumption 1). It is assumed that the renal clearance of the drug is proportional to GFR (assumption 2) and any additional influence caused by changes in tubular function can be ignored. Additionally, an easily obtainable estimate of GFR (eGFR) is assumed to be a good approximation to the true GFR (assumption 3). Hence, the maintenance dose rate that is recommended will be proportional to eGFR (axiom 4, assumption 5). We acknowledge that these assumptions would be reasonable for many renally cleared drugs, particularly those with a wide therapeutic range and those that are primarily cleared by glomerular filtration, e.g. aminoglycosides. However, this may not be the case for drugs that are handled extensively by the tubules, such as metformin. Therefore, any assertion that the INH does not hold may have implications for dosing drugs that are mainly cleared through tubular processes.
An important limitation of our work is that we did not review studies that may have inadvertently assessed the INH in the course of research with other primary aims. An example of this would be a pharmacokinetic renal drug study where renal drug clearance might be regressed against an estimate of GFR. We speculate that there are potentially a large number of these studies in the literature but a review of these publications was beyond the scope of the current study. Secondly, the use of different units for GFR measures, GFR indexed by different body size (body surface area or weight) or absolute GFR, in the studies, may have introduced bias in allocation into the three groups. While important, it was not possible to account for these differences in the studies reviewed.
In summary, we found that 24 of the 30 studies included in this systematic review did not support the INH. Overall, this finding casts doubt on the INH as a general model for renal drug handling, particularly for drugs that are eliminated extensively by tubular mechanisms. Until further evidence is available, we recommend that future studies evaluate the potential for a non-linear relationship between renal drug clearance and GFR on a case-by-case basis.