Introduction
For nearly 30 years, the Pharmacy & Therapeutics (P&T) Committees have been operative throughout the Spanish hospital network [ ]. Their function is to review all available drugs in order to select those which have the most favorable risk/benefit ratio to become part of the hospital’s drug formulary [ ]. One common strategy for managing medication use via the formulary consists of including therapeutic interchange policies for prescriptions that are not included in the hospital drug formulary [ ].
Therapeutic interchange (TI) is based on the premise that the drugs being interchanged are considered to be clinically equivalent, having, in most cases, close similarity in efficacy and safety profiles. TI, which should be differentiated from generic substitution (Table 1 ) [ , ], entails determining which drug is the most appropriate to be prescribed according to a given hospital’s or care center’s medication policies, along with the reference healthcare protocols of the healthcare system overall. Table 1 Definition of therapeutic interchange, therapeutic substitution, and generic substitution [ , ] Therapeutic interchange The dispensing of a drug that is therapeutically equivalent but chemically different from the drug originally prescribed by a physician or other authorized prescriber. Although usually of the same pharmacological class, appropriate drugs for therapeutic interchange may differ in pharmacokinetic and chemical properties, and may have a different mechanism of action, adverse reaction profile, toxicity, and/or pharmacological interactions. In most cases, the interchanged drugs are closely similar in efficacy and safety profiles. It is an authorized exchange of therapeutic equivalence in accordance with previously established and approved written guidelines or protocols within a formulary system. Therapeutic substitution It is the act of dispensing a therapeutic equivalence for the drug product prescribed without prior authorization of the prescriber. Generic substitution The substitution of drugs products that contain the same active ingredient or ingredients and are chemically identical in strength, concentration, dosage form, and route of administration to the drug product prescribed.
TI is important in the healthcare delivery organization mainly as a result of two primary influences: the rapid expansion in the number of drugs within the same or similar pharmacological classes and the need to control drug and related healthcare costs while promoting more rational drug therapy. It is intended to promote the efficient use of medicines, ensure their availability at the right place and time, and to facilitate their control and rational use [ ].
Over the years, clinical experience has suggested that a number of therapies can be successfully interchanged in patients. However, TI must be done cautiously, providing adequate information, especially in patients with complex illnesses and specific clinical situations (compromised organ function, elderly, pregnant, etc.) [ ].
TI has been pioneered in both national healthcare systems and local agencies in the USA [ , ], Canada [ ], New Zealand, and Australia, as well as in many European countries [ , ]. However, the implementation of TI varies widely across countries and depends heavily on the healthcare system in place.
Regarding the methodology used to carry out TI, general recommendations have been published [ , , , ], as well as specific algorithms and procedures for certain therapeutic groups [ , ]. The Standards and Procedures Commission of the Spanish Society of Hospital Pharmacy (SEFH in its Spanish abbreviation) has standardized procedures for drug selection in Spain [ ]. However, neither a standardized methodology nor a systematic and detailed procedure applicable to therapeutic interchange has been developed to date.
Objectives
To collect and summarize literature specific to TI focusing on methodological approaches in order to develop a list of steps that healthcare facilities can consult when developing pharmacotherapeutic interchange guidelines (PTIGs) in hospitals and primary care centers.
Methods
This systematic review was conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [ ]. Prior to that, the review protocol was developed according to the Cochrane method with the aid of the RevMan 5.1 program (background, objectives, inclusion criteria, search strategy, methods for data extraction and analysis). This protocol was not registered.
Search strategy
The PICO model (population, patient, or problem/intervention/comparison/outcome) was used to develop the literature search strategy. Problem: TI; intervention: any methodology, implementation, guidelines, scientific society position papers that aid in developing a PTIG; comparison: methodologies, implementation, guidelines, scientific society position papers; outcome: steps, key points to consider in developing a PTIG.
A systematic search was carried out in the following electronic databases: PreMEDLINE, Medline, EMBASE, PsycINFO, and the Cochrane Library. The key terms of the Medline and EMBASE search were “drug formulary” OR “drug formularies” OR “therapeutic interchange” OR “drug list” or “formulary management” OR “pharmaceutical formulary” OR “therapeutic substitution” OR “therapeutic exchange” OR “therapeutic conversion program” OR “formulary conversion program” OR “therapeutic equivalence”, in the title, excluding comments, letters, editorial, or news items. Articles published up to and including December 2015 in either English or Spanish were identified. In addition, other information sources were taken into account, including the International Network of Agencies for Health Technology Assessment (INAHTA), websites of agencies not included in the INAHTA, and international institutions and providers reporting for their healthcare systems, including the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association’s Technology Evaluation Center, the Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences (ICES), and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). We also reviewed the websites of various scientific societies, such as the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, the American College of Clinical Pharmacy, the American Medical Association, and the Spanish Society of Hospital Pharmacy (SEFH-Genesis). Finally, articles and secondary publications published by experts were identified with the aid of the “AlquimiA” search engine [ ]. The bibliographies of relevant articles were also searched.
Following the removal of duplicates, two reviewers assessed the titles and abstracts from retrieving references according to the selection criteria. Any discrepancies were resolved by consensus.
Eligibility criteria
The inclusion criteria were articles published on TI: methodology, implementation (with clinical and economics outcomes), TI guidelines, documents of assessment agencies, scientific society position papers, legal aspects, surveys, and recommendations. The exclusion criteria were comments, letters, editorials, and news articles.
Data extraction
Two reviewers read the full-text version of all the included articles and extracted the data independently. The relevant data were then recorded with the aid of a data extraction table, in which the following information was collected: author, year of publication, therapeutic group, drugs interchanged, study type (methodology, implementation, patient outcomes, surveys, legal aspects, guidelines), and study design. For each article, study type, drugs interchanged, methodology, participants and method, results, limitations, and conflicts of interests were all taken into account.
Data synthesis
Due to the heterogeneity of study settings, methodologies, and outcomes reported, a qualitative analysis was conducted. The characteristics of the studies included were summarized. The articles were classified according to the inclusion criteria (study type). The articles that described the interchange in clinical practice were grouped into therapeutic groups, analyzing the study design and identifying which pharmacotherapeutic groups were mostly published. Also, the time period in which the greatest number of published papers were reviewed, as well as the year of approval for each drug by regulatory agencies. After this, for each article, the average time between the last approval date of the drugs and the date of publication of each article was calculated. Finally, the regional study was identified.
Given the heterogeneity of the study designs, most of which were descriptive, it was not possible to find a valid tool for evaluating study quality. For observational studies, the STROBE statement [ ] was applied to verify that at least the items collected complied with the published results. For the remaining studies, a checklist was drawn up based on the eligibility criteria and, in cases of disagreement between the reviewers, a second revision was carried out by consensus.
Results
The review process followed PRISMA guidelines, as shown in Fig. 1 [ ]. From a total of 703 manuals, guidelines, and studies originally identified, 488 remained after the elimination of duplicates. Upon reading the titles and abstracts, an additional 377 were excluded. From the 111 remaining articles, nine were found not to be relevant and were, likewise, excluded. As a result, 102 articles met the eligibility criteria and were included for assessment in the final review. Fig. 1 PRISMA 2009 flow diagram [ ]
Study characteristics
The main characteristics of the included studies are described in Table 2 [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. The most important details are summarized for each study in Appendices 1 and 2 (in the electronic supplementary material). Table 2 Summary of all the included studies Reference Interchanged drugs Study type Study design a Study location Cardiovascular 1 Lee et al. (2012) [ ] ARBs Planning of a therapeutic interchange program, methodology, and implementation: clinical and economic outcomes Retrospective study Taiwan 2 Hilleman et al. (2001) [ ] CCBs Implementation: clinical and economic outcomes Retrospective study USA 3 Márquez-Peiró et al. (2009) [ ] ARBs Implementation: clinical outcomes Analytic, observational, prospective, and longitudinal study Spain 4 Porta Oltra et al. (2005) [ ] ARBs Implementation: standardization of a TI program Not applicable Spain 5 Peris Martí et al. (2003) [ ] ARBs Methodology (protocol development) and implementation: clinical outcomes Descriptive study Spain 6 Cholvi Llovel and Climente Martí (2002) [ ] CCBs Methodology (algorithm development), implementation, and impact on prescriptions Descriptive study Spain 7 Signorovitch et al. (2010) [ ] ARBs Implementation: economic outcomes Cohort study USA 8 Mamdani et al. (2000) [ ] CCBs Implementation: economic outcomes Pre/post analysis, retrospective cohort study USA 9 Stoysich and Massoomi (2002) [ ] ACE inhibitors Methodology and implementation: all stages of a TI program Not applicable USA 10 Bull et al. (1999) [ ] ACE inhibitors Implementation of a methodology to evaluate a TI program Not applicable USA 11 Mason (1996) [ ] ACE inhibitors Implementation: impact on prescriptions after implementing a TI program Retrospective review USA 12 Clay et al. (2000) [ ] CCBs Implementation: clinical outcomes Not specified USA 13 Walters et al. (2000) [ ] CCBs Implementation: clinical outcomes Non-randomized, double-blind trial USA 14 Navarro de Lara (2010) [ ] ARBs, ACE inhibitors, CCBs, sulfonylureas Implementation: clinical and economic outcomes Analytic, observational, retrospective study Spain 15 Mercadal Orfila et al. (2005) [ ] Sulfonylureas Implementation: clinical outcomes Case–control study Spain 16 Tan et al. (2012) [ ] Beta-blockers Implementation: clinical and economic outcomes Not specified Singapore Nervous system 17 Stock and Kofoed (1994) [ ] SSRIs Implementation: clinical outcomes Comparative study USA 18 Martínez-Granados et al. (2011) [ ] Second-generation antidepressants Methodology and implementation: clinical outcomes Not specified Spain Digestive system 19 Rich (1989) [ ] H2 antagonists Methodology: model for implementing a TI program Not applicable USA 20 Rosich et al. (2012) [ ] PPIs Impact on prescriptions after implementation of a TI program Community trial Spain 21 Chase et al. (1998) [ ] H2 antagonists Implementation: compliance; methodology for the implementation of a TI and for drafting a PTIG Not applicable USA 22 Galt et al. (2000) [ ] PPIs (same project as 22, 23, 24) Patient outcomes: clinical and human outcomes from the patient’s perspective Quasi-experimental study USA 23 Galt et al. (2001) [ ] PPIs (same project as 22, 23, 24) Patient outcomes: clinical and human outcomes from the patient’s perspective Quasi-experimental study USA 24 Sodorff et al. (2002) [ ] PPIs (same project as 22, 23, 24) Patient outcomes: clinical and human outcomes from the patient’s perspective Quasi-experimental study USA 25 Condra et al. (1999) [ ] PPIs Patient outcomes: satisfaction Survey USA 26 Amidon et al. (2000) [ ] PPIs Implementation: clinical and economic outcomes Retrospective analysis USA 27 Nelson et al. (2000) [ ] PPIs Implementation: clinical and human results Observational study USA 28 Howard et al. (2000) [ ] H2 antagonists Implementation: clinical and economic outcomes Retrospective analysis USA 29 Oh and Franko (1990) [ ] H2 antagonists Implementation: stages in the implementation process and costs Not applicable USA Antibiotics 30 Frighetto et al. (1995) [ ] Antibiotics Implementation: costs and compliance with the program Descriptive study. Retrospective Canada 31 Martin et al. (1990) [ ] Antibiotics Implementation: clinical outcomes, compliance with the program, costs (savings) Retrospective study USA 32 Lawrenz et al. (1991) [ ] Antibiotics Implementation: stages and general outcomes Descriptive study. Prospective USA 33 Brown and Clarke (1992) [ ] Antibiotics Implementation: clinical outcomes and costs Retrospective study Canada 34 Martinusen et al. (1993) [ ] Antibiotics Comparative study of two drugs (antibiotics) to assess whether they can be interchanged Two-phase, open, sequential study Canada 35 Lomaestro (2001) [ ] Antibiotics Methodology: description of a TI method for fluoroquinolones Not applicable USA 36 Rapp (2007) [ ] Antibiotics Aspects to consider in fluoroquinolone (antibiotics) TI Narrative review USA Statins 37 Weng et al. (2010) [ ] Statins Systematic review to establish equivalence among statins—only article to provide EVIDENCE for establishing TI Systematic review with meta-analysis Taiwan 38 García-Sabina et al. (2012) [ ] Statins Aspects to consider in statin TI—evaluation of analytical results to establish equivalence and/or assessment of clinical parameters Not applicable Spain 39 Mohammed et al. (2010) [ ] Statins Implementation: stages and costs Descriptive study Saudi Arabia 40 Grace et al. (2002) [ ] Statins Implementation of TI in a clinical setting Descriptive study USA 41 Cheetham et al. (2005) [ ] Statins Implementation: efficacy and safety Observational database study. Pretest/posttest design USA 42 Billups et al. (2005) [ ] Statins Implementation: clinical and economic outcomes Retrospective study USA 43 Hilleman et al. (2001) [ ] Statins Implementation: short-term clinical outcomes and cost-effectiveness Open-label, fixed dosage, one-way crossover study USA 44 Fugit and Resch (2000) [ ] Statins Implementation: clinical outcomes and costs Descriptive study USA 45 Ito et al. (1999) [ ] Statins Methodology and implementation: description of a TI program and pre-TI basal outcomes Open-label trial USA 46 Ito et al. (2001) [ ] Statins Implementation: continuation of prior study. Post-TI implementation results: clinical outcomes and costs Open-label trial USA 47 Taylor et al. (2001) [ ] Statins Implementation: clinical outcomes and costs Observational study USA 48 Patel et al. (1999) [ ] Statins Implementation: clinical outcomes, QoL, patient satisfaction, costs Prospective cohort study USA 49 Moisan et al. (1999) [ ] Statins Implementation: clinical outcomes, doctors’ visits, costs Before and after study Canada 50 Korman and Borysiuk (1995) [ ] Statins Implementation: clinical outcomes and costs Descriptive study USA Antiemetics 51 Steiner et al. (2003) [ ] 5-HT3RAs Implementation: clinical outcomes Cohort study USA Dementia 52 Pak et al. (2011) [ ] Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors Implementation: clinical outcomes Retrospective study USA COX-2 inhibitors 53 Tran et al. (2004) [ ] COX-2 inhibitors Implementation: clinical and economic outcomes Descriptive study USA Biological therapies 54 Bergstrom et al. (2000) [ ] Biological drugs Methodology: consensus Not applicable USA 55 Flood et al. (2007) [ ] Biological drugs RA/PS Methodology: consensus Not applicable USA 56 Anonymous (2005) [ ] Erythropoiesis stimulants Methodology Not applicable USA 57 Adamson et al. (2005) [ ] Erythropoiesis stimulants Methodology: pre-implementation Not applicable USA 58 Brophy et al. (2005) [ ] Erythropoiesis stimulants Implementation: economic outcomes Retrospective study USA 59 Merli et al. (2001) [ ] LMWH Methodology Not applicable USA 60 Allen et al. (2003) [ ] LMWH Implementation: analysis of cost-effectiveness Retrospective cohort study USA 61 Komorny and Ewald (2002) [ ] LMWH Implementation: clinical outcomes Retrospective study USA 62 Krotenberg et al. (2001) [ ] LMWH Implementation: clinical and economic outcomes Retrospective cohort study USA 63 Bollinger et al. (2000) [ ] LMWH Methodology for implementation. Clinical outcomes: efficacy and safety Retrospective study USA 64 Gainor et al. (2003) [ ] LMWH Methodology and liability considerations Not applicable USA 65 Amin (2011) [ ] LMWH Methodology for elaborating a TI program Not applicable USA Hormone replacement therapy 66 Baluch et al. (1999) [ ] Estrogens Implementation: costs and acceptance Descriptive study USA 67 Andrade et al. (2000) [ ] Estrogens Implementation: acceptance Retrospective study USA Others 68 Eurich et al. (2001) [ ] Implementation Post-discharge follow-up: determining TI-related problems after discharge Non-randomized, prospective with non-parallel groups with control group Canada 69 D’Amore et al. (2003) [ ] Implementation Post-discharge follow-up: effect of a TI program on drug prescriptions after discharge USA 70 Oh and Franko (1991) [ ] Implementation Implementation: description of a TI program USA 71 Larmour et al. (2011) [ ] Implementation Implementation: description of a TI program Australia 72 Navarro de Lara et al. (2004) [ ] Implementation Implementation and assessment of a quality TI program Spain 73 Heiner (1996) [ ] Implementation Implementation: methodology of the communication process for a TI program USA 74 Poole (2005) [ ] Survey Survey of pharmacists and doctors about their perceptions regarding TI USA 75 Moultry and Wilmer (2009) [ ] Survey Survey of hospitals about their policies and procedures for carrying out TI USA 76 Schachtner et al. (2002) [ ] Survey Survey of hospitals on the prevalence of TI and cost savings achieved USA 77 O’Connell and Seay (1996) [ ] Survey Survey of hospitals on the percentage of hospitals that carry out TI automatically without contacting the physician USA 78 Bell et al. (2007) [ ] Survey Survey of hospitals to determine which cardiovascular drugs and PPIs were selected for TI Canada 79 Eurich et al. (2001) [ ] Survey Survey of hospitals on the prevalence of TI, the procedures used, drugs selected, and perception of hospital pharmacists Canada Legal aspects 80 Carroll (2011) [ ] Legal aspects Legal aspects USA 81 Brushwood (2001) [ ] Legal aspects Legal aspects USA 82 Plumeri and Crane (1992) [ ] Legal aspects Legal aspects USA TI guidelines 83 ACCP (1993) [ ] TI guidelines USA 84 ACCP (2005) [ ] TI guidelines USA 85 ASCP (1997) [ ] TI guidelines USA Scientific society position papers 86 ASHP (2008) [ ] Scientific society position paper USA 87 ASHP (2008) [ ] Scientific society position paper USA 88 ASHP (1992) [ ] Scientific society position paper USA 89 AMA (1994) [ ] Scientific society position paper USA 90 AMA (2004) [ ] Scientific society position paper USA 91 AMA (2011) [ ] Scientific society position paper USA 92 ACCF/AHA (2011) [ ] Scientific society position paper USA 93 ACP (1990) [ ] Scientific society position paper USA 94 SEFH (2003) [ ] Scientific society position paper Spain Methodology: algorithm 95 Wall and Abel (1996) [ ] Methodology USA 96 Walk et al. (2008) [ ] Methodology Germany 97 Stewart (2004) [ ] Recommendations regarding TI Canada 98 Johnston et al. (2011) [ ] Recommendations regarding TI European countries 99 Shulman et al. (1992) [ ] Recommendations regarding TI USA TI in primary care 100 Carroll (2000) [ ] TI in a community pharmacy USA 101 Carroll (1999) [ ] TI in ambulatory settings USA 102 Manolakis (2007) [ ] TI in ambulatory settings USA Excluded 103 Johnston (2010) [ ] Europe 104 Johnston et al. (2010) [ ] Europe 105 Sadowsky et al. (2005) [ ] USA 106 Sadowsky et al. (2010) [ ] USA 107 Sadowsky et al. (2009) [ ] USA 108 Merli and Groce (2010) [ ] USA 109 Meissner et al. (2006) [ ] USA 110 Segal et al. (1998) [ ] USA 111 Goldwater et al. (2001) [ ] USA ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme; ACCF/AHA American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association; ACCP American College of Clinical Pharmacy; ACP American College of Physicians; AMA American Medical Association; ARBs angiotensin receptor blockers; ASCP American Society of Consultant Pharmacists; ASHP American Society of Health-System Pharmacists; CCBs calcium channel blockers; 5-HT3RAs serotonin type 3 receptor antagonists; LMWH low molecular weight heparins; COX-2 cyclooxygenase-2; PPIs proton pump inhibitors; PS psoriasis; RA rheumatoid arthritis; SSRIs selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; SEFH the Spanish Society of Hospital Pharmacy; TI therapeutic interchange a The classification of the study design has been extracted directly from the information provided by the authors of each article
Included in the review were three guidelines on how to implement TI [ , , ], nine position papers from various scientific societies on the subject of TI [ , , , , , , , , ], two articles dealing exclusively with methodology (incorporating an algorithm [ , ]), three articles with recommendations for TI [ , , ], three articles dealing with legal issues [ , , ], four general articles about implementation [ , , , ], two articles dealing with the follow-up of discharged TI patients [ , ], six articles containing surveys on TI [ , , , , , ], and three articles about the use of TI in ambulatory care [ , , ]. Also included were 67 articles that described TI in clinical practice, which were grouped into therapeutic groups. Most of these articles were applicability/implementation studies (60 articles) with detailed clinical and cost analyses, which also tended to include methodological aspects, 17 articles [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ] dealt mainly with methodology, and four analyzed patients’ perspective and satisfaction [ , , , ].
The classification of the study design has been extracted directly from the information provided by the authors of each article. From 67 articles focused on therapeutic interchange, only 50 specified the design, and in another 14 studies, no design can be applied because there are no results in patients. It has not been possible to unify the design of the studies because most of the authors have not made a clear description of the design. The majority were non-experimental studies with a descriptive purpose; only in four studies was the STROBE statement [ ] applied, comprising three cohort studies [ , , ] and one case–control study [ ]; the mean compliance for the 22 items was 15.5 (range 15–16). There were four experimental trials.
Most of the published articles dealing with therapeutic groups were focused on statins (14 articles), cardiovascular drugs (16 articles), digestive medications (11 articles, most of which dealt with proton inhibitors), and, more recently, biological products (12 articles).
The time period in which the greatest number of papers on TI were published is provided in Table 3 . The approval date by drug regulatory agencies for all the drugs studied in the selected articles was examined as shown in Table 4 . In the 1990s, most of the approved drugs were for high blood pressure medications (angiotensin-converting enzyme or ACE inhibitors), calcium antagonists, angiotensin II receptor antagonists (ARA-II), antidepressants, and statins. The average time between the last approval date of the drugs and the date of publication of each article was calculated, giving a result of 7.1 years (standard deviation, SD: 3.4 years). Table 3 Years of publication of the articles Years of publication Number of published articles (%) Before 1990 1 (0.98) 1990–1994 14 (13.7) 1995–1999 14 (13.7) 2000–2004 40 (39.21) 2005–2009 17 (16.7) 2010–2015 16 (15.69) Total no. of articles 102 Table 4 Approval date of the drugs by regulatory agency (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, FDA) Years of approval Number of approved drugs (%) 1940s 1 (0.9) 1960s 2 (1.8) 1970s 9 (7.9) 1980s 26 (22.8) 1990s 54 (47.4) 2000–2010 22 (19.3) Total number of drugs that appeared in the included articles 114
The studies came from nine countries: 74% were carried out in the USA, followed by Spain and Canada, with 11 and 8%, respectively. Other countries that contributed to the literature on TI were Taiwan, Australia, Germany, Saudi Arabia, and Singapore.
In total, it was possible to identify eight steps for obtaining adequate results in TI program development: 1. Review all published clinical evidence to assess the therapeutic equivalence of the drugs used in the interchange. 2. Assess the indications approved by regulatory agencies. 3. Analyze all efficacy and safety data for each indication and the various clinical situations. 4. Consider the impact of the TI in different patient populations. 5. Establish clinical and economic outcomes, as well as technical measures. 6. Develop an educational plan for prescribers and health professionals who deal with TI. 7. Obtain approval for the TI from the institution and approve the PTIG in the Pharmaceutical Commissions. 8. Implement a follow-up protocol for the TI’s effects in health outcomes.
Discussion
Despite carrying out extensive searches and identifying 111 articles, there were no manuals describing the procedures for developing a PTIG. However, three articles defined a set of TI guidelines, criteria, and factors to consider when performing TI, while six articles provided structured algorithms that included the following consistency-to-interchange variables: therapeutic indication, efficacy, contraindications, patient subgroups, adverse effect profile, drug interactions, compliance and/or adherence, treatment duration, therapeutically equivalent doses, and therapeutic effect. Articles on therapeutic groups focused mainly on implementation and often included methodology and patient outcomes.
TI is a common practice in hospitals around the world, mainly in the USA, where 87.2% of hospitals have TI policies [ ], Spain, where 71% have TI programs [ ], and both Canada and Australia. This information agrees with the regional study of the articles included in this review. This trend can be traced back to the 1990s, when many “me too” drugs came on the market.
It is worth mentioning that, when the research in a certain field progresses rapidly, the number of publications increases and, on the other hand, when research progresses slowly, the publication frequency also decreases (antibiotics are an example).
The current trend shows that newly marketed drugs provide no added therapeutic value and are similar to those already available. In a review published in Revue Prescrire examining medicines marketed between 2005 and 2014 (1032 drugs), 51% (532 drugs) provided nothing new from the alternatives already commercially available [ ]. Miller and Lanthier [ ] analyzed the biological innovations authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) between 1986 and 2014, and found that 26% of the newly approved drugs contributed nothing new; in the case of small molecules, this percentage reached 49%. Therefore, the importance of having standardized procedures or steps that help professionals to carry out TI is crucial.
Biosimilars of biological drug therapies (mainly monoclonal antibodies and tumor necrosis factor inhibitors) have recently begun to appear on the market, raising the question of their interchangeability. At the moment, there is no European-wide consensus, although various medical societies and organizations have taken a stance on the issue [ , , , ]. Indeed, several national European agencies have come out in favor of the interchangeability of biosimilars under the supervision of prescribing physicians [ ]. In contrast, the Australian authorities have already issued guidelines for the automatic substitution of biosimilars [ ].
The substitution of a certain drug for a more economical therapeutic equivalent is an obvious way to reduce costs while maintaining the same outcomes in terms of efficacy and patient safety. This is especially important as rising health costs constitute a major problem for healthcare systems in the developed world. In fact, the aging of the population combined with strict financial constraints requires profound changes in order to maintain the sustainability of any modern healthcare system.
TI is still somewhat controversial when applied to the new therapies; therefore, in order to make it a standard practice while ensuring both clinical benefits and patient safety, common guidelines need to be developed by hospital P&T Committees in conjunction with the Commissions on the Rational Use of Medications. An exhaustive methodology should be developed which evaluates the entire body of available evidence to ensure that the results are similar, in both efficacy and safety, as well as to establish algorithms to determine in which cases the interchange should not be performed and therapeutic equivalence cannot be assumed. The goal for any treatment should be to obtain the best health outcomes in patients while contributing to the sustainability of the healthcare system. To this end, it is necessary to establish evidence-based procedures agreed upon by interdisciplinary teams and it is very important to take into account the TI during the medication reconciliation process and during transitions in care within and outside of the organization [ ].
Limitations
This study has several limitations which should be taken into account. First, the heterogeneity of the available literature, along with the great variability in study design, type, and characteristics, rendered a quantitative evaluation (meta-analysis) inappropriate. Due to this heterogeneity, in some studies, the external validity or applicability may be compromised, which makes feasibility in different environments difficult. It was, likewise, impossible to perform a standard quality assessment for the different studies included in the analysis, as most of the published literature was based on expert opinion and/or non-experimental studies. It is necessary that future authors make an effort to improve the description of the study design and it is important to define which type of studies is the most appropriate to evaluate the results of a TI. Furthermore, because the time period between publications is very broad—from 1989 to 2015—there has been a noticeable evolution in the terminology; various key terms were used to avoid misinformation. In addition, several studies did not differentiate between the terms “generic substitution” and “therapeutic interchange,” which underscores the need to reach an international consensus on the terminology to be used. Finally, another possible bias stems from the fact that only articles in English and Spanish were included in the review.
Conclusions
Therapeutic interchange (TI) is a very important practice within healthcare organizations, mainly in hospitals through the Pharmacy & Therapeutics (P&T) Committee. This review identified published guidelines, position papers, recommendations, and studies on TI carried out in hospital settings, as well as surveys and legal aspects of TI. The most significant conclusion based on all the information collected is that there are eight steps that must be taken into account in the development of any TI program to ensure that the patient receives another drug in similar conditions of efficacy and safety.