Introduction
Inter- and intraindividual pharmacokinetics variability in humans affects the way in which drugs act on the body [ ]. Gastrointestinal (GI) surgery has an impact on this variability and can significantly alter the pharmacokinetics of drugs in post-surgical patients [ ].
The way in which pharmacokinetic profiles are modified depends on the type of operative procedure performed. The extent to which the absorption of different groups of drugs is affected varies according to the site and length of intestinal resections. Despite the fact that most drugs are minimally absorbed in the stomach, gastric resection influences primarily two pharmacokinetic parameters: the gastric emptying rate, which determines the time the drug is in contact with the absorptive surface area, and acid production, which influences pH and, consequently, the ionized form of the various active ingredients and their passage through the different cell barriers [ ].
In bariatric surgery, procedures are categorized into three main groups: restrictive (adjustable gastric banding, ring vertical gastroplasty, sleeve gastrectomy), malabsorptive or predominantly malabsorptive combined procedures (jejunoileal bypass, Scopinaro or Larrad biliopancreatic diversion, duodenal switch, single-anastomosis duodeno-ileal bypass with sleeve gastrectomy [SADI-S]), and combined procedures (Roux-en-Y gastric bypass). In patients undergoing restrictive-malabsorptive procedures, as is the case with the Roux-en-Y-gastric bypass, drugs primarily released in the stomach and absorbed in the duodenum are likely to exhibit decreased bioavailability. On the other hand, complications related to an altered circulation of bile salts and absorption of lipophilic drugs are to be expected with malabsorptive procedures such as the jejunoileal bypass [ , , ].
In addition, the release of the active ingredient prior to drug absorption should be taken into the consideration, as it varies according to dosage form, directly affecting drug disintegration, and thus favoring the absorption process to a greater or lesser extent [ , ].
The aim of this study was to collect all the information available in the literature on the changes that occur in the pharmacokinetic profiles of drugs administered to patients who have undergone GI surgery, in order to improve clinical practice in this specific group of patients.
Material and methods
We conducted a systematic search of the literature in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines [ ] (Appendix I ). The selection of databases for bibliographic searches, all accessible through our corporative online library [ ], was carried out using the COSI (Core, Standard, Ideal) protocol [ ]. Three databases were searched: MEDLINE (PubMed), Embase, and the Cochrane Library. Search methods included the PICO (Patient, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome) template, adapted to the interrogation programs of each of the databases and their possibilities; both free-text (titles and abstracts) and controlled vocabulary (MeSH, Emtree, etc.) terms were used. Subheadings and filters, both thematic and methodological, were applied. There was no chronological restriction for the bibliographic searches before the final reading of the complete texts in English, French, and Spanish. The combinations of all queries and search stages were performed with Boolean operators. The search strategy is detailed in the supplementary material (Appendix II ). Once the articles were located according to the inclusion criteria for each question, the papers were retrieved and selected according to the title and the summary abstract of each. Subsequently, a manual search of references was carried out for the selected complete texts of greater interest. The process for selecting studies is reflected in Fig. 1 . For the storage, elimination of duplicates, and final edition, the Mendeley Reference Manager bibliography software tool was used. Two independent reviewers examined the titles and abstracts of the articles obtained in the first search to identify relevant studies. Full texts of all studies meeting the inclusion criteria were reviewed, and their bibliographic references were checked for additional sources. Articles that were deemed relevant by both reviewers were included in the analysis. In the case of disagreement, a third reviewer analyzed the article. Fig. 1. Flowchart of the selection process for the systematic review
For each drug, grades of recommendation were determined by levels of evidence assigned to studies, based on the methodological quality of their design, validity, and applicability to patient care according to the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (CEBM) guidelines [ ]. Recommendations for every drug were extracted from the results of the studies and were collected according to authors’ criteria as practical conclusions.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
We reviewed all the selected articles according to the search strategy detailed in Appendix II . The search was limited to 1) articles published in scientific journals included in the MEDLINE, Embase, or Cochrane Library databases, and 2) articles written in English, French or Spanish.
We included case reports, case-control studies, case series, clinical trials, outcomes research, cohort studies, and ecological studies that evaluated the alteration of the pharmacokinetics or therapeutic response to different treatments after a gastrointestinal surgical procedure in a human population.
We also excluded abstracts only, conference presentations, commentaries, review articles, update papers, and letters to the editor. Those papers written by the same authors were meticulously compared in order to discard duplicate studies.
Results
We identified a total of 814 articles among the three databases (692 in PubMed/MEDLINE, 111 in Embase, and 11 in the Cochrane Library). Finally, according to the process for selecting studies reflected in the flowchart (Fig. 1 ), 66 articles passed through the selection process. Two articles were added by manual search, making a total of 68 articles: 20 case reports, 14 case–control studies, 14 case series, 4 clinical trials, 12 outcomes research articles, 3 cohort studies, and 1 ecological study.
The selected articles, ordered by author, are recorded in Appendix III , indicating the drugs described, the type of surgery, number of subjects, and type of study.
The results of the search are presented in Table 1 , where a total of 60 drugs, ordered by therapeutic group, are collected. The main outcomes of the different studies were classified according to each type of surgery. Of the 60 drugs reviewed, 20 did not report a significant alteration in pharmacokinetics, or no modification of the clinical response was observed. Table 1 Pharmacokinetic alterations of drugs following gastrointestinal surgery Therapeutic group Drug Main outcomes by surgical procedure Grades of recommendation [ ] Conclusion A02 Drugs for acid-related disorders Omeprazole [ , ] RYGB Faster absorption. The exposure to omeprazole is lower after surgery. B Consider increasing the dose if symptoms suggest inadequate response. A10 Drugs used in diabetes Metformin [ ] RYGB Absorption and bioavailability seem to be higher after gastric bypass. B Decrease dose after surgery and monitor for glycemia. A12 Mineral supplements Calcium [ , , ] RYGB Calcium citrate resulted in a significantly higher serum C max and AUC. B Recommended use of calcium citrate. RYGB In patients who have undergone RYGB, potassium calcium citrate (effervescent) was superior to calcium citrate in conferring calcium bioavailability and suppressing parathyroid hormone secretion. B Vitamin D [ ] Bowel resection Intestinal absorption decreased in patients with intestinal resection, with the degree of malabsorption reflecting the extent of resection. B Monitor plasma levels. Oral 25-hydroxycholecalciferol supplementation may be preferred in those with severe short bowel syndrome. B01 Antithrombotic agents Warfarin [ ] RYGB/esophagojejunostomy Absorbed in the stomach and duodenum. Gastric resection, specifically total gastrectomy and an esophagojejunostomy, may display warfarin resistance. No absorption changes in short bowel. D Monitor closely. Assess potential malabsorption-related vitamin K deficiency. Consider dose adjustment based on INR. Dabigatran [ ] SBS (≤200 CM) Exposure appears to be significantly lower in SBS population. Plasma drug levels showed significant interindividual variability. C Monitor closely. Rivaroxaban [ , , ] SBS (≤200CM) Plasma drug levels showed significant interindividual variability. D Monitor closely. Gastric bypass without gastrectomy/gastro-jejunostomy. Rapidly absorbed in the upper gastrointestinal tract. Resorption of rivaroxaban is not significantly impaired by bariatric surgery. D RYGB/SG There were no relevant alterations in the clinical pharmacological profile of rivaroxaban in the postoperative setting compared to results obtained prior to the surgery. B Maintain dosage. Close monitoring is also recommended. Apixaban [ ] SBS Absorbed primarily in the upper gastrointestinal tract, with linear pharmacokinetics of 2.5–25 mg. D Monitor closely. Acetylsalicylic acid [ , , ] RYGB Absorption takes place in the stomach and proximal small intestine. Faster absorption after RYGB. The exposure is higher post-surgery. B Decrease dose following surgery and monitor closely. SBS A length of small intestine of at least 30 cm is compatible with the absorption. C Maintain dosage. Close monitoring is also recommended. Clopidogrel [ ] SBS Rapidly absorbed in the intestine. Low intestinal absorption of clopidogrel was the likely cause of non-responsiveness in SBS patients. D Monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. Consider alternative therapy. Ticagrelor [ ] SBS Does not require conversion from a prodrug. D Potential alternative therapy in SBS. B03 Antianemic preparations Iron [ ] Gastrectomy The solubility of inorganic iron decreases when gastric acid secretion is reduced. Consequently, ferrous ions are less absorbed in patients after gastrectomy. Ferrous sulfate showed better results than ferrous glycinate chelate for the treatment of iron deficiency anemia in patients after gastrectomy. C Recommended use of ferrous sulfate. C01 Cardiac therapy Digoxin [ , , ] JIB Absorption occurred in the duodenum and upper jejunum and only 10% in the stomach. Steady-state serum concentrations did not differ significantly before and after surgery. C Monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. Regular pharmacokinetic monitoring recommended. Jejunostomy Poor absorption of digoxin in tablet, gel cap, and elixir forms in a patient with an end jejunostomy. D RYGB procedure alters the pattern of absorption without significantly changing the overall exposure to the drug. C C07 Beta-blocking agents Propranolol [ ] Gastric resection Billroth Lipophilic drug with decreased absorption following partial gastrectomy. B Monitor blood pressure. Consider alternative therapy. Atenolol [ ] Gastric resection Billroth Hydrophilic drug with better absorption profile than propranolol in patients after gastrectomy. B Potential alternative therapy in patients after gastrectomy. Monitor blood pressure. Metoprolol [ ] RYGB Metoprolol is known to cross the intestinal mucosa through passive diffusion. Drug with high solubility and high permeability. Its absorption is not expected to be altered significantly after RYGB. B Monitor blood pressure. C10 Lipid-modifying agents Atorvastatin [ , , ] BPD-DS Reduction in the first-pass CYP metabolism in the small intestine. An increase in systemic exposure of atorvastatin was seen after BPD-DS. B Decrease dose following surgery and monitor lipid profile. GBS Substantial interindividual variability in the effect of gastric bypass on systemic exposure to atorvastatin. Patients who have undergone gastric bypass should therefore be treated on a de novo basis and re-titrated to the lowest effective doses. B GBS/BPD-DS Patients should be monitored closely for both therapeutic effects and adverse events during the first years after gastric bypass and duodenal switch. B G03 Sex hormones and genital system modulators Ethinyloestradiol [ ] Ileostomy Normal bioavailability in women after ileostomy. The situation may be different in women with more extensive small bowel resection or with ileostomy diarrhea. B Consider alternative contraceptive measures in women with extensive small bowel resection or ileostomy with diarrhea. Levonorgestrel [ ] Ileostomy Normal bioavailability in women after ileostomy. The situation may be different in women with more extensive small bowel resection or with ileostomy diarrhea. B Consider alternative contraceptive measures in women with extensive small bowel resection or ileostomy with diarrhea. H03 Thyroid therapy Levothyroxine [ , , , ] RYGB Patients developed elevated TSH levels after surgery, which was reversed by switching from treatment with oral tablets to a liquid formulation. C Monitor thyroid profile and therapeutic response. Recommended liquid formulation in patients with BPD. RYGB Absorption is not diminished after surgery. A small delay in absorption of LT4 was observed in some patients due to placement of the jejunoileal segment close to the gastric pouch B SG/RYGB/BPD-LL The stomach, duodenum, and upper part of the jejunum are bypassed or removed in these procedures. It appears that levothyroxine is absorbed primarily in the lower part of the jejunum and the ileum. B RYGB/BPD Normal gastric acid secretion is necessary for effective absorption of LT4 by dissolution of tablets. Liquid LT4 can prevent the problem of malabsorption in patients with BPD. B J01 Antibiotics for systemic use Moxifloxacin [ ] RYGB No significant alterations in gastric bypass patients. C No dose adjustment needed. Monitor therapeutic response. Azithromycin [ ] GBS Concentrations substantially reduced in gastric bypass subjects. B Dose modification and/or closer clinical monitoring for treatment failure may be required. Tetracycline [ ] Gastric resection Billroth The aqueous solubility is strongly influenced by pH. No significant differences in absorption observed after gastrectomy. B Monitor therapeutic response. Linezolid [ ] RYGB The bioavailability of linezolid is not impaired. C No dose adjustment needed. Monitor therapeutic response. Metronidazole [ ] Jejunoileal shunt The lowest AUC was seen for 1 patient with jejunoileal shunt. This could indicate that the large bowel may be the site of the major portion of the absorption, although compensatory hypertrophy of the jejunum and ileum may have developed. Ileostomy patients: it may be speculated whether a delayed gastric emptying may contribute to the slower rate of absorption in these patients. Prolonged intestinal transit time is suggested to contribute to more efficient absorption. C Special monitoring of serum levels does not seem necessary. In patients with ileostomy the dose should be reduced to 2/3 of the normal dose. J05 Antivirals for systemic use Tenofovir (TDF) [ ] SG Dissolved in gastric acid, which is an essential step in the absorption process. C No modification of TDF regimen appeared necessary. Monitor therapeutic response. Tenofovir/emtricitabine [ ] RYGB Once-daily TDF/FTC produced trough concentrations similar to historical data in patient who previously underwent RYGB with virologic suppression and immunologic recovery. D Monitor therapeutic response. Darunavir/ritonavir [ ] RYGB Twice-daily DRV/r produced trough concentrations similar to historical data in patient who previously underwent RYGB with virologic suppression and immunologic recovery. D Monitor therapeutic response. Lopinavir (LPV) [ ] Gastrojejunal bypass Jejunum must be the most important site of absorption of lopinavir. Oral administration with high-fat meal through gastrojejunal bypass achieved a sufficient concentration of LPV. D Monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. Darunavir [ ] SBS Decreased plasma concentrations. However, repeated TDM over 10 weeks resulted in successful treatment in this case. D Monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. Ritonavir/lopinavir [ ] SBS Decreased plasma concentrations. However, repeated TDM over 10 weeks resulted in successful treatment in this case. D Monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. Etravirine [ ] SBS Decreased plasma concentrations. However, repeated TDM over 10 weeks resulted in successful treatment in this case. D Monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. Maraviroc [ ] SBS Decreased plasma concentrations. However, repeated TDM over 10 weeks resulted in successful treatment in this case. D Monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. Raltegravir [ ] SBS Decreased plasma concentrations. However, repeated TDM over 10 weeks resulted in successful treatment in this case. D Monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (LDV/SOF) [ , ] RYGB Ledipasvir has pH-dependent solubility and becomes insoluble at pH ≥ 4. Effectiveness of LDV/SOF demonstrated in a patient with a history of RYGB. D LDV/SOF may be an option for patients with a history of gastric bypass. Monitor therapeutic response. Gastric resection Billroth No dose adjustment needed to achieved SVR despite the lack of a stomach in a patient. D L01 Antineoplastic agents Imatinib [ , , ] SBS (jejunostomy) Oral bioavailability nearly 100%. Site of absorption is not known. The data resulted in an increased dosage (600 mg/day) of imatinib with an increased volume of water for better dissolution. D Consider monitoring plasma concentrations in morbidly obese patients with chronic myeloid leukemia or gastrointestinal stromal tumors who undergo sleeve gastrectomy or gastric resection. Increased total imatinib doses may be considered in an attempt to achieve imatinib concentrations reported to be necessary for therapeutic response in chronic myeloid leukemia and gastrointestinal stromal tumors. SG Increased total imatinib doses may be considered in an attempt to achieve imatinib concentrations reported to be necessary for therapeutic response in chronic myeloid leukemia and gastrointestinal stromal tumors. D Gastrointestinal resection Imatinib C min was significantly lower in patients who had undergone major gastrectomy than in those who had not. Although its clinical impact is unclear at the present time, monitoring of imatinib C min might be particularly important for optimal treatment with imatinib in patients who have undergone major gastrectomy. B Sunitinib [ ] Gastrectomy Major gastrectomy alone does not influence exposure to sunitinib or its active metabolite. In combined gastrectomy and small bowel resection, a statistically significant, though not clinically relevant, decreased plasma exposure was observed. A No dose adjustment needed. Monitor therapeutic response. Temozolamide [ ] RYGB Oral bioavailability is approximately 100%. Site of absorption is not known. Temozolamide pharmacokinetics are not negatively affected by a gastric bypass. D No dose adjustment needed. Monitor therapeutic response. L04A Immunosuppressants Sirolimus [ ] Transplant recipients with GBS would need higher doses of sirolimus to provide similar exposure to that in a non-bypass patient. C Monitor closely. Higher doses would be needed to provide similar exposure to that in a non-bypass patient. Mycophenolic acid [ , ] LSG Dose modification of immunosuppressants post-LSG may not be necessary aside from standard therapeutic drug monitoring. B No dose adjustment needed. Monitor therapeutic response GBS Transplant recipients with GBS would need higher doses of mycophenolic acid to provide similar exposure to that in a non-bypass patient. C Monitor closely. Higher doses would be needed to provide similar exposure to that in a non-bypass patient. Tacrolimus [ , , , ] JIB reversal In JIB reversal, higher systemic levels of tacrolimus required lower steady-state doses. D Monitor closely. Higher doses would be needed to provide similar exposure to that in a non-bypass patient. GBS Transplant recipients with GBS would need higher doses of tacrolimus to provide similar exposure to that in a non-bypass patient. C LSG Dose modification of immunosuppressants post-LSG may not be necessary aside from standard therapeutic drug monitoring. B SBS Absorbed predominantly in the upper part of the small intestine. A significant amount can be absorbed from the stomach and duodenum. Effective levels of immunosuppression can be achieved by oral administration of tacrolimus in children with short or absent small bowel. C Cyclosporine [ , ] JIB Therapeutic concentrations of cyclosporine obtained 2 h after oral administration can be achieved without intravenous administration even with 90% of the small bowel excluded from the absorption process after JIB. However, it may be necessary to increase dose. C Monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. Regular pharmacokinetic monitoring. Patients with short bowel syndrome needing cyclosporine immunosuppression can achieve effective therapeutic concentrations only following intravenous administration. SBS Absorption impaired in SBS because of rapid transit through the bowel. C N02 Analgesics Paracetamol [ , , ] Surgical resection of the gastrointestinal tract In patients with normal intact gastrointestinal tract, most of a dose of oral paracetamol is absorbed from the jejunum distal to the duodenojejunal flexure. B Consider dose adjustment or alternative pain therapy in case of duodenostomy and jejunostomy. RYGB/SG After bariatric surgery, paracetamol absorption takes place faster (earlier T max values) and reaches higher plasma concentrations ( C max ), resulting in higher bioavailability (AUC) in comparison to the same individuals before surgery. The increase in paracetamol oral bioavailability can be explained by a higher fraction of paracetamol absorbed across the gut wall. B JIB Paracetamol was absorbed normally in the presence of malabsorption following bypass surgery. B Paracetamol/tramadol [ ] RYGB Higher concentrations of tramadol with conventional tablet vs. effervescent. B Monitor therapeutic response. Recommended conventional tablet vs. effervescent. Oxycodone [ ] RYGB Variation in pH after gastrectomy should not affect the release of the drug. Total gastrectomy did not affect the pharmacokinetics of oxycodone administered in extended-release tablets. B No dose adjustment needed. Monitor therapeutic response. Morphine [ ] RYGB had a significant effect on the morphine T max and C max . The higher C max and AUC may also result from a decreased intestinal and/or liver first-pass effect after RYGB and weight loss. B Dose should be lower after RYGB. Ketoprofen [ ] Total/partial gastrectomy Weak acid. Significant reduction of the stomach size in total gastrectomy which resulted in slower gastric mixing and reduced disintegration of solid dosage form. B After gastrectomy it might be necessary to apply a higher dose of analgesic. N03 Antiepileptics Phenytoin [ , ] RYGB Phenytoin levels were undetectable in a patient despite a high dose. Alternative drugs or routes of administration should be considered when possible. D Monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. Consider dose adjustment and regular monitoring of pharmacokinetics. Ileojejunal bypass Decreased absorption determined in patients who had undergone jejunoileal bypass. Subjects with an ileojejunal bypass receiving phenytoin are likely to require increased oral dosage to achieve an optimal plasma concentration. B N05 Psycholeptics Midazolam [ ] RYGB Substrate of CYP3A4 with low baseline oral bioavailability. Increased C max after surgery. RYGB procedure alters the pattern of absorption without significantly changing the overall exposure to the drug. C Monitor therapeutic response. Lithium [ ] RYGB Lithium carbonate is sensitive to gastric bypass surgery and shows significant increases in dissolution and absorption, causing previously stable plasma levels to become toxic without a change in the dose administered. D Decrease dose after surgery and monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. N06 Psychoanaleptics Amitriptyline [ ] SBS Extensively absorbed through the stomach and small intestine. D Grind sugar-coated tablets or open capsules and dissolve dose to favor absorption in patients with intestinal resection. Monitor therapeutic response. Nortriptyline [ ] SBS Completely ionized in the stomach. Absorption most likely occurs in the small bowel (64% bioavailability in normal subjects). D. Monitor therapeutic response. Sertraline [ ] RYGB Presystemic metabolism. Decreased absorption area and metabolism. B Monitor therapeutic response because of likely decreased efficacy. Duloxetine [ ] RYGB alters the amount of drug absorbed and the time over which it is absorbed. B Monitor therapeutic response because of likely decreased efficacy. Venlafaxine [ ] RYGB does not significantly alter the amount of venlafaxine or its active metabolite. B Monitor therapeutic response. Citalopram [ ] SBS Normal concentration–dose ratio was observed in patients with at least 180 cm of small intestine, or 80 cm of small intestine and 50% of remaining. C Monitor therapeutic response. Escitalopram [ ] SBS Normal concentration–dose ratio was observed in patients with at least 180 cm of small intestine, or 80 cm of small intestine and 50% of remaining. C Monitor therapeutic response. Methylphenidate [ ] RYGB may alter the absorption of orally administered methylphenidate. D Closely monitor the therapeutic response and toxic effects. N07 Other nervous system drugs Methadone [ ] SG Serum concentrations increased from before to 5 days after surgery and continued to increase for 7 months thereafter. D Monitor plasma levels and therapeutic response. BPD biliopancreatic diversion, BPD-DS biliopancreatic diversion-duodenal switch, GBS gastric bypass surgery, JIB jejunoileal bypass, LSG laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy, RYGB Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, SBS short bowel syndrome, SG sleeve gastrectomy, SVR sustained virologic response
Discussion
The new clinical and anatomical situation of patients following GI surgery results in the need to evaluate their drug therapy and monitor potential alterations in clinical response.
Two of the five steps outlined in the LADME (Liberation, Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, and Excretion) pharmacokinetic model, which describes the process a drug undergoes in the body [ ], are affected by gastrointestinal surgery; therefore, the amount of drug in the blood, its pharmacokinetics, and ultimately its therapeutic effect can be altered.
The release of the active ingredient is the first step to be taken into account in the absorption process in the gastrointestinal tract. Drug disintegration has a significant influence on this step. A reduced stomach surface area may result in shorter gastric transit time and reduced acid secretion [ ]. These factors may prevent the drug from completely disintegrating before reaching the intestine; thus the active ingredient may not be adequately released and the drug may be excreted in the fecal material. This should be taken into account when extended-release or retard dosage forms are used. Likewise, when possible, the use of liquid medication formulations in which the active ingredient is already dissolved or in suspension is recommended in order to promote absorption, as release of the active ingredient in these pharmaceutical forms is not required [ , ].
Secondly, drug absorption should be considered. This involves the passage of drug molecules through physiological barriers, in this case the intestinal wall, to the blood circulation [ ]. Drug solubility influences absorption and is mainly affected by alterations in gastric pH. Generally, pH is increased, as gastric resection or reduction of the stomach surface area mainly removes tissue from the fundus, which is the area where the largest amount of hydrochloric acid is produced [ ]. The net decrease in acid makes the gastric environment more alkaline and thus affects drug dissolution. Since drug absorption primarily occurs from non-ionized forms, compounds that are more alkaline will exhibit a better absorption profile than more acidic compounds such as rifampicin, digoxin, and ketoconazole [ , ]. The size of the available intestinal surface area also plays a major role in the absorption process. Additionally, because extended-release or retard formulations require a longer transit time for the active ingredient to be fully released, this process may be affected according to the site and extent of the resection [ ].
Special attention should be given to drugs with absorption windows—i.e., active ingredients with a single absorption site—as the drug is no longer absorbed and is excreted when this gastrointestinal segment has been removed [ ].
In addition, the fact that the level of P-glycoprotein, a transporter that diminishes the absorption of certain drugs by returning them to the intestinal lumen, is greater in the distal areas of the intestine should be taken into account. The absorption of drugs affected by this transporter may decrease if there is no duodenal surface available to compensate for this effect, as in the case of patients having undergone malabsorptive or predominantly malabsorptive combined procedures [ , ].
The absorption of lipophilic drugs is affected by the presence and amount of bile salts and is therefore altered when the upper part of the small intestine is removed, as mixing of the drug with the bile salts is inadequate [ ]. Likewise, compounds that are dependent on the enterohepatic cycle to maintain their activity, such as digoxin and loperamide, will be affected [ ].
Although many publications describe the processes comprising the LADME pharmacokinetic model, it is difficult to find detailed descriptions of the release and absorption processes of the active ingredients available in our health-care system. Sites showing a greater probability of absorption of different molecules have been identified in some publications, and alterations in plasma levels of different drugs following certain surgical procedures have been documented, but sample sizes were generally small and statistical power was weak [ , , , ]. Cases in which changes in clinical response have been found have also been described, although drug plasma levels were not monitored [ ].
The limited availability of published studies on pharmacokinetic variability according to surgical procedure renders the decision of whether to modify or continue administering a drug therapy more difficult. As a result, it is necessary to search the literature to find useful tools for patient management following the operation. In the case of drugs that can be monitored by clinical response, by analytical values, or through blood pharmacokinetic studies, they must be closely followed up by the physician.
The main limitation of the present study is the paucity and inconclusiveness of the scientific evidence available. Sample sizes used in the available sources selected in this review were small, and most publications were old or referred to clinical cases or case series, generally with weak statistical power. Given this lack of evidence that hinders the ability to make firm clinical decisions in clinical practice, the data collected in this paper can be used as a tool for guiding clinical decisions. The conclusions indicated in Table 1 can guide or predict the behavior of different drugs in a specific group of patients.