Background
Postoperative nausea vomiting (PONV) and pain are among the most bothersome complications related to surgery for patients. When combined together, they account for nearly 90% of patient’s apprehensions prior to the surgery [ ]. Both pain and PONV are known to significantly lower patient satisfaction in the perioperative period. It is estimated that without the use of prophylactic antiemetics, the average PONV incidence would range from 20 to 30% in patients undergoing surgery under general anesthesia [ ]. Interestingly, many trials have suggested that increased postoperative pain may enhance the PONV reported by the patients [ ]. An important factor contributing to this finding may be that increased use of analgesic medications may increase PONV. Opioids are one of the first-line perioperative analgesics and are well known to increase PONV incidence. Unfortunately, treating one complication may increase the other, making the overall perioperative patient experience poor [ ]. Though non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) lower pain, they are not known to possess a direct antiemetic effect [ ].
In the postoperative clinical scenario, an ideal pharmacologic agent would have beneficial effects on both pain and nausea and vomiting. Over the last decade, many studies have suggested that the use of perioperative steroids such as dexamethasone may be associated with both lower pain scores and a lower incidence of PONV. Multiple trials have compared dexamethasone to well-established antiemetics such as 5-HT3 receptor antagonists and prokinetic agents for antiemetic efficacy. Results of these trials have shown varying conclusions without consistently demonstrating a superiority of one over the other. We planned the meta-analysis to consolidate available evidence in this regard. We also attempted to quantify the comparative antiemetic potential along with analgesic benefits of dexamethasone when compared to other frontline antiemetics.
Materials and methods
We followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines for performing this meta-analysis [Fig. 1 ] [ ]. The potential studies to be included in the present analysis were identified using the PICOS (Population, Intervention, Control and Outcome Study) design recommended by the Cochrane Collaboration. Relevance of a trial to our present study question was assessed by two independent reviewers. After literature search, trials were abstracted into the prepared PICOS format (Supplementary Table 1 ). Studies comparing the antiemetic efficacy of dexamethasone to 5-HT3 receptor antagonists were included. Antiemetic efficacy parameters that were consistently compared and documented across various trials were planned to be included as explorative outcomes. The salient features of trials included in the final analysis that met the above criterion are shown in Table 1 . The statistical analysis of the pooled data was performed using comprehensive meta-analysis version 3 (Biostat Inc., USA). Trial sequential analysis was performed by using the Trial Sequential Analysis software by Copenhagen Trial Unit, Denmark. Fig. 1 PRISMA flow diagram illustrating flow chart outlining retrieved, excluded, and included studies Table 1 Table showing characteristics of included studies Author Year Country Surgery Groups/dose in (mg) Measured outcomes Specific comments Dexa time 1 Alghanem et al. [ ] 2009 Jordan Laparoscopic cholecystectomy, ASA 1 and 2 aged 18–70 male and female ● Dexa 8 ● Ondan 4 ● Saline ● VAS scores 0–10 at 4 and 24 h ● Rescue emetic use 0–24 h ● PONV 0–4, 4–24, 0–24 h Dexa and ondan did not significantly reduce PONV or VAS pain scores at 4 and 24 h when added to TIVA, avoidance of perioperative opioids, high flow O2, and generous fluids. Post-induction 2 Ali Hessami et al. [ ] 2012 Iran Laparoscopic cholecystectomy, ASA 1 and 2 male and female 20–60 y/o ● Dexa 8 ● Gran 3 ● Nausea or vomiting 0–24 h ● Rescue antiemetic 0–24 h ● Side effects Dexa and gran had similar effects in prophylaxis of PONV. Pre-induction 3 Mahmoud et al. [ ] 2012 Iran Tympanoplasty type 1, ASA 1, and 2 male and female ● Dexa 8 ● Ondan 4 ● Distilled water ● 0–3: (1) nausea; (2) nausea w/ belching; (3) vomiting: 0–2,2–8, 8–16, 16–24 h ● Incidence rates of PONV 0–24 h No difference between groups in 0–2 h. Significantly decreased PONV with Ondan and Dexa in 2–8, 8–16 and 16–24 h. In 8–16 h and 16–24 h PONV was significantly lower with Dexa compared to Ondan. Pre-induction 4 Yamac Erhan et al. [ ] 2008 Turkey Laparoscopic cholecystectomy, ASA 1 and 2 male and female ● Dexa 8 ● Saline ● Ondan 4 ● Gran 3 ● 0–6, 6–12, 12–24 h. Rescue antiemetic use, nausea, vomiting ●0–24 h. Nausea, vomiting or complete response to prophylaxis Dexa was as effective as ondan and gran and more effective than placebo in reducing PONV. All had significantly reduced antiemetic used compared to control. Pre-induction 5 Thomas 2001 et al. [ ] 2001 UK Gynecological surgery, ASA 1 or 2 pre-menopausal female patients 19–53 years old ● Dexa 8 mg ● Ondan 4 mg ● Dexa 8 + Ondan 4 ● Nausea, retching, vomiting 0–3,3–12,12–24 h ● Failure of prophylaxis 0-24 h ● Pain 1–4 scale at 3 and 24 h ● Adverse effects Significant decrease with combination of dexa and ondan compared to either alone at 0–3 h. No significant difference 0–24 h, 3–12 h, or 12–24 h. but there was a trend favoring combination. Post-induction 6 Jhi-Joung Wang (T)-th et al. [ ] 2002 Taiwan Epidural anesthesia for abdominal hysterectomy ± oophorectomy ASA 1 or 2 35–55-year-old females ● Dexa 5 ● Trop 5 ● Saline ● 0–10 pain VAS scores at 4, 8, 20, 24 h ● Rescue analgesic and emetic use, nausea, vomiting, vomiting episodes 0–24 h ● Incidence of pruritis and headache Dexa had lower incidence of PONV and rescue emetics. Post-surgery 7 Jhi-Joung Wang et al. [ ] 2002 Taiwan Laparoscopic cholecystectomy, ASA 1 or 2 male and females ● Dexa 5 ● Trop 2 ● Saline ● 0–10 VAS pain scores 0–24 h. Nausea, vomiting, vomiting episodes, rescue antiemetics, complete response No difference in rescue analgesic in 24 h. Dexa and trop had lower incidence of PONV and better complete responses to PONV prophylaxis; also, they used significantly less rescue antiemetics than saline. Post-induction 8 Jhi-Joung Wang et al. [ ] 2002 Taiwan Tympanomastoid surgery, ASA 1 or 2 35–55-year-old male and female ● Dexa 5 ● Trop 2 ● Saline ● 0–10 Pain VAS scores ● 0–24 h. rescue antiemetic use, complete response, nausea alone, nausea with vomiting and severe vomiting Dexa significantly reduced the incidence of PONV, along with severe PONV compared to trop and saline. Dexa reduced the use of rescue antiemetics compared to Trop and placebo. Trop was not difference than placebo in any of these categories. Post-induction 9 MS Yuksek et al. [ ] 2003 Turkey Gynecological laparoscopic surgery, ASA 1 or 2 19–62-year-old females ● Dexa 8 ● Ondan 4 mg ● Saline 0–24 h: 10-point VAS score, nausea, vomiting, rescue analgesic, rescue antiemetic, sedation score, adverse effects. First morphine fentanyl time Ondan had significantly reduced PONV and rescue antiemetic use compared to control for 0–24 h. Also, ondan had significantly less vomiting/retching and antiemetic use 0–3 h compared to control. There was no significant difference between ondan and dexa. Pre-induction 10 Nita D’Souza et al. [ ] 2011 India Gynecological laparoscopic surgery women age 20–69 years old ASA 1 or 2 ● Dexa 4 mg ● Ondan 4 mg ● 0–24 h rescue antiemetic use, incidence nausea and vomiting● 0–3, 3–6, 6–12, 12–24 incidence nausea and vomiting ● Adverse effects, tramadol rescue analgesic use Dexa 4 mg significantly reduced PONV 0–3 h compared to ondan. Dexa 4 needed significantly less rescue antiemetic than ondan 4 mg. No difference in rescue analgesic. No significant difference in PONV over 24 h through larger symptom-free percentage in dexa 4 then ondan 4. Pre-induction 11 Eberhart et al. [ ] 2006 Germany Gynecological and ENT-procedures ASA 1–3, males and females ● Dexa 8 ● Trop 5 ● Trop 5 + Dexa 8 ●Placebo ● 0–24 h incidence and severity of PONV, use of antiemetic treatment and adverse effects. Trop and dexa reduced incidence and severity of PONV compared to placebo. The combination was significant in reduction of PONV compared to Dexa. Pre-induction 12 Gupta et al. [ ] 2006 India Laparoscopic surgery, ASA 1 or 2 males and females ● Dexa 5 ● Ondan 4 ● 0–24 h incidence and severity of nausea and vomiting Dexa decreased the incidence of PONV and was comparable to ondan with non-significant decreases in PONV. Pre-induction 13 Younghoon Jeon et al. [ ] 2010 Korea Thyroidectomy, ASA 1 or 2 women ● Dexa 8 ●Ramo 0.3 ● Dexa 8 + Ramo 0.3 ● 0–24 h incidence of nausea, vomiting, severity of nausea, rescue antiemetics use, postoperative ketorolac use, other adverse effects. Ramo and dexa was significant in reducing PONV compared to Dexa. Ramo was comparable to the combination. Post-induction 14 Shahryar Sane et al. [ ] 2015 Iran Cesarean section with spinal anesthesia, ASA 1 or 2 women 20–40 years old ● Dexa 8 ● Ondan 4 ● Dexa 8 + ondan 4 ● Intraoperative PONV, postoperative PONV, blood pressure, shivering Combination of ondan and dexa was more effective than either alone in preventing PONV and shivering. Post-induction 15 Song et al. [ ] 2013 Korea Thyroid surgery ● Dexa 10 ● Ramo 0.3 ● Control ● Incidence of nausea, vomiting, and rescue antiemetic use 0–1, 1–6, 6–12, 12–24, 24–48, 0–48 h. ● Nausea severity by VAS score, ketorolac consumption ● Shivering severity Ramo and dexa decreased incidence and severity of post op nausea and use of rescue antiemetics. Both also decreased pain and shivering compared to placebo. Ramo was superior to dexa for reducing nausea, antiemetic drug use. Post-induction 16 Szilvia Szarvas 2003 et al. [ ] 2003 Ireland Major orthopedic surgery, ASA 1–3 male and female patients ● Dexa 8 ● Ondan 8 ● Dexa 8 + ondan 4 ● 0–4, 4–8, 8–24 h severity of PONV and pruritis, pain, rescue antiemetic use, failure of PONV prophylaxis ● 0–24 h failure of prophylaxis, opioid analgesic consumption, incidence puritis Dexa was inferior to ondan as well as a combination of ondan and dexa in PONV prophylaxis. Post-induction 17 Hammad Usmani 2003 et al. [ ] 2003 India Middle ear procedures, ASA 1 and 2 males and females ● Dexa ● Ondan ● Dexa + ondan ● 0–4, 4–24 h. Incidence nausea, vomiting, retching, complete response, rescue antiemetic use ● Adverse effects Combination of ondan and dexa was more effective in preventing PONV than ondan or dexa alone. Dexa and ondan were similar in effect. No difference in side effects was seen in all three groups. Pre-induction 18 M. Wattwil et al. [ ] 2003 Sweden Breast surgery, ASA 1–3 women age 18–78 ● Dexa 4 ● Ondan 4 ● 0–4, 4–8, 8–16, 16–24 h. Pain VAS score, nausea VAS score, total analgesic consumption ● 0–24 h. nausea, vomiting, and PONV, analgesic consumption, rescue emetic use Dexa was as effective as ondan in preventing PONV. Post-induction 19 Tugsan Egemen Bllgln et al. [ ] 2010 Turkey Total abdominal hysterectomy w/ bilateral salphingo-oopherectomy, ASA 1–2 age 20–60-year-old females ● Dexa 8 ● Ondan 4 ● Meto 10 ● Placebo ● 0–2, 2–12, 12–24 h. Incidence of PON, POV, PONV, rescue antiemetic, pain VAS score, tramadol consumption ● Adverse effects Dexa, ondan, and meto were all significantly superior to placebo in preventing PONV. But dexa, ondan and meto were all equivocal in preventing PONV and rescue antiemetic use. Pre-induction 20 Melissa Nespeca Mendes et al. [ ] 2009 Brazil Laparoscopic gastroplasties, age 20–56 ASA BMI > 35 males + females ● Dexa ● Ondan ● Control ● Incidence of PONV in recovery from surgery Dexa and ondan reduced PONV compared to control. A combination of dexa and ondan reduced PONV more than either drug alone. Dexa dexamethason, Ramo ramo, Ondan ondan, Meto meto, Trop tropistron, Gran gran, PONV postoperative nausea and vomiting
Literature search strategy
Two reviewers independently searched the online literature available on PubMed, Embase, Medline, Science Citation Index Expanded, Google Scholar, Scopus, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, clinical trials registry and meta-register of controlled trials for published manuscripts until 31 August 2017. References and Bibliographies of selected publications, systematic reviews, and editorials on antiemetic comparative efficacy of dexamethasone were also screened using Web of Science (SCI/SSCI). The following medical subject heading (MeSH) terms were screened for Dexamethasone versus ondansetron , granisetron , palonosetron , 5-HT3 receptor antagonists , dexamethasone for PONV , analgesic efficacy dexamethasone , PONV prophylaxis dexamethasone. We excluded the following terms from the search string: chemotherapy dexamethasone , prokinetic agents versus dexamethasone , dexamethasone versus placebo , dexamethasone as adjuvant for PONV. We included only randomized controlled prospective trials in our analysis. We placed no restrictions on the dose of dexamethasone used for PONV prophylaxis. Timing of dexamethasone administration was not used as a restriction for a trial to be included. We planned to perform pooled analysis comparing the efficacy of time of dexamethasone administration by subgrouping into preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative administration. We expanded our search to articles published as full manuscripts or meeting abstracts, in peer-reviewed journals. However, we made sure that any article that would be included would have undergone a peer review process. We also manually searched the references of comparable meta-analysis and included manuscripts for relevant trials that could have been missed by electronic search. We also included trials published in both English and non-English languages. Once the abstract was analyzed by the searching reviewer and found appropriate, the full text of the article was studied. The decision to include a trial into final analysis was based upon the independent assessment of the two reviewers. Any disagreements between the two were harmonized by consensus and arbitration by a third neutral reviewer. Based upon the recommendations by the Cochrane Collaboration, another independent researcher assessed the included trials for quality of evidence and possible methodological bias [ ].
Data extraction and principal endpoints
Relevant data were extracted from the full-text article of each included study, using a data extraction form prepared in Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Inc., USA). The following data was extracted from the included trials: year and country of publication, study design, nature of surgery, antiemetic used, time of antiemetic administration, dose of dexamethasone used, vomiting frequency, nausea vomiting reported (early/delayed), patients needing no additional antiemetics, comparative analgesic use, blood sugars in both groups, and specific complications. We attempted to extract frequency data of individual complications for detailed analysis; however, reporting was very inconsistent among trials. Additionally, the nature of complications reported varied significantly across the trials, and therefore a grouping of these was not possible and further analysis based upon complications could not be performed. If in any trial the data was found to be incomplete, we attempted to contact the corresponding author via e-mail for relevant/missing data. If data of interest was expressed in terms of median and interquartile range (for blood sugar values), authors were similarly contacted for the mean and SD values. However, if we could not get a response, we estimated the mean and standard deviation of that dataset using Hozo’s validated formula for the same [ , ]. In a few trials, actual dose of dexamethasone was not reported but authors used a patient weight-based dose. In such case, we used the reported mean weight of patients to estimate the actual dose of dexamethasone used. We also planned to compare the nausea scores at various time points. All reported nausea scores were converted into a numeric 11-point scale (0 to 10), where zero meant no nausea, one represented minimal nausea, and worst possible nausea denoted a score of ten. Analysis could be performed for the following (wherever three or more subgroups reported the variable) across the studies. 1. Comparative incidence of vomiting at 24 h (primary outcome) 2. Incidence of nausea—this included patients reporting significant nausea (as were defined/reported by the included trials). We were able to group these into either early (within first 6 h or in the postoperative care unit (PACU)) and delayed PONV incidence in the first 24 h after the surgery. 3. Complete response—this variable included patients requiring no additional rescue antiemetic. This variable was also subdivided into early and delayed based upon the above defined criterion. 4. Need for rescue—this variable included number of patients requiring additional rescue antiemetics within the first 24 h after surgery.
Statistical methods
Meta-analysis was performed using fixed-effect modeling and subsequently random-effect modeling if heterogeneity was found to be higher than 40%. Wherever, heterogeneity was found to be higher than 40% results from “random-effect modeling” were reported. I 2 statistic was used to quantify the heterogeneity between the trials. Values of I 2 < 40% were considered non-significant, 40–60% were considered to represent moderate heterogeneity, 60–90% was reported as high heterogeneity. For frequency variables, results were expressed as Mantel Haenszel odds ratio (MH-odds ratio) with corresponding 95% confidence interval. “ P ” value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Number needed to treat (NNT) was calculated to evaluate the pharmacoeconomic aspects of dexamethasone wherever results demonstrated superiority/inferiority.
We used the Trial sequential analysis software to perform meta-analysis for equivalence. The “δ” for this comparison was set at 5% with a power of 85%. Clinically, this 5% δ would mean that the absolute cumulative rates for vomiting incidence for dexamethasone and 5-HT3 RAs should lie within 5% of each other. If the efficacy of two antiemetics is within 5% of each other, then the clinical choice of one over the other is likely to be governed more based upon the additional effects rather than the primary PONV efficacy. Trial sequential analysis (TSA) is a recently developed tool in statistical testing of a meta-analysis. For simplification, TSA evaluates the need for further trials on a topic. If TSA concludes that pooled information size is adequate and superiority boundary is crossed, further trials are unlikely to change the present conclusion. On the contrary, if the pooled information size is not met or the superiority boundary is not crossed by cumulative Z-score, more trials can alter the present conclusion. Thus, TSA evaluates the need for further trials and also symbolizes the strength of the present results. Another unique feature of TSA is to evaluate for “equivalence” which was not otherwise possible, by alternate analysis methods as they could only perform superiority/inferiority-based comparisons. We used two methods available within the TSA for testing sample adequacy and intervention equivalence. First method used was the classical boundary method where the “α error” was set to 5%. The second method used was O’Brien-Fleming α-spending function for testing for futility. For this, the δ (difference in incidence rates between dexamethasone and 5-HT3 RAs) was set at 5% and a β of 20%. The absolute incidence of vomiting rates of 5-HT3 RAs and dexamethasone was within 5% of each other as represented by δ of 5% in the TSA. If the cumulative Z-score lie within the boundary of futility, the interventions are equivalent.
For dose response evaluation, a meta-regression based upon comparisons with 5HT3 receptor antagonists was performed. R 2 statistic was used to quantify and estimate the variance in regression model explained by dose variation of dexamethasone across included trials.
Risk of bias assessment
All publications found during the search were manually and independently reviewed by two independent reviewers. Criteria that were used for assessing the risk of bias were based upon the recommendations of the Cochrane Collaboration [ ] and included method of randomization; concealed treatment allocation; blinding during pre-, peri-, and postoperative care; blinded data collection and analysis; blinded adjudication of study endpoints; and completeness of data. The graphical synopsis of the above assessment was constructed using the software Review Manager 5 (Cochrane Collaboration).
Studies were also assessed for a possible publication bias, initially using a funnel plot and later quantified using the Egger’s test.
Results
We identified 679 articles during our preliminary search within the above-specified medical database. Duplicates obtained from individual search by different reviewers were identified and eliminated using Endnote (Thompson Reuters, USA). Nineteen manuscripts were identified using electronic database search that were directly related to our defined primary or secondary outcomes. Manual search of references of the related trials or reviews found one study that reported one or more outcomes of interest. All the included trials were prospective randomized controlled studies. Most of the included studies had multiple drug comparisons, meaning they had more than two comparing groups (for our inclusion, one had to be dexamethasone and another a 5-HT3 RA). Of the total 20 included trials, 12 had three comparator groups and four trials each had two and four groups, respectively. the study by D’Souza et al. compared two different doses of dexamethasone (4 mg and 8 mg) to ondansetron, and the trial by Erhan et al. compared dexamethasone to both ondansetron and granisetron. The comparative data for individual group was provided separately in both the above studies, and we were thus able to get two separate comparisons from each of these studies. As a result, we had 22 comparing subgroups for our primary/secondary outcomes. Eight of 20 trials compared PONV profiles in patients undergoing laparoscopic abdominal/gynecological surgeries. The remaining 12 trials were more heterogenous in the nature of the surgeries and included procedures like thyroidectomy, tympanoplasty, orthopedic surgeries, and open abdominal procedures etc. (detailed in Table 1 ).
Studies compared different types of 5-HT3 RAs to dexamethasone. Ondansetron seemed to be the most popular choice/comparator with 14 subgroups (with 2 subgroups from the D’Souza et al. study) comparing it to dexamethasone. Other 5-HT3 RAs compared included tropisetron (four subgroups), ramosetron (two subgroups), and granisetron (two subgroups). Time of the antiemetic administration was reported in 19 of the included trials. Time of antiemetic administration varied across trials. Most studies used PONV prophylaxis pre-induction or post-induction (during surgery); nine trials each. Only one trial used PONV prophylaxis immediately after surgery.
We could pool the results of comparative antiemetic efficacy under the following heads.
Vomiting incidence
Cumulative incidence of vomiting over 24-h was reported in 17 trials that had 19 subgroups that had 804 and 815 patients in dexamethasone and 5-HT3 RA group, respectively. The vomiting incidence in the dexamethasone group was 12.31% (95% CI being 10.22 to 14.77) and in 5-HT3 RA group was 12.76% (95% CI being 10.64 to 15.23). The MH-Odds ratio for vomiting with the use of dexamethasone in comparison to 5-HT3 RAs was 0.97 (95% CI being 0.71 to 1.34), P = 0.86. The heterogeneity for the above pooled results was 2.94%. (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Forest plot showing pooled MH-Odds ratio for vomiting incidence at 24 h. Solid diamond at the bottom of comparison denotes the final net effect. The I 2 (heterogeneity) for this comparison was 2.94%
Evaluation for equivalence
As the pooled P value for the above comparison was 0.86, a conclusion that one intervention is superior/inferior to another is technically incorrect. Such a result is possible under two circumstances. The possibilities are that either the two interventions are “actually equivalent” or the sample size (referred to as information size (IS) variable in a meta-analysis) is inadequate. Both the above possibilities in our analysis were evaluated using the “trial sequential analysis” tool (Fig. 3 ). The required estimated information size for conventional boundary method was 495, and our cumulative value was found to be 1619. On constructing the TSA graph, cumulative “Z-scores” were within the inner wedge of futility and indicated equivalence. The information size of 1619 was well past the required 573 for O’Brien-Fleming α-spending function as well. Fig. 3 Trial sequential analysis for incidence of vomiting at 24 h postoperatively showing equivalence of dexamethasone and 5-HT3 receptor antagonists. The lower half of the graph below the zero axis represents the area of advantage with control, and the upper half represents the advantage area with dexamethasone. Etched lines (brown) at + 1.96 and − 1.96 on Y-axis represent the conventional model boundaries for TSA with an α of 5%. The minimum required information size (IS) for conventional boundary model for equivalence is 495. The X-axis is scaled to provide equal distance to all the included trials. The redlines represent the alpha-spending boundary (Upper O’Brien Fleming with α of 5% and β of 20%). The area to the left of wedge formed by the red lines of alpha-spending is the area of futility. The area to the right of the wedge is the area of equivalence. The information size (IS) for alpha-spending boundary model = 573 (shown on vertical line intersecting X-axis in red). Z-scores are calculated sequentially by adding results of individual trials based upon chronological order. In this graph, cumulative Z-score line remains within the equivalence range for both conventional boundary and the futility boundary (diverging red lines from X-axis). Thus, interventions being evaluated are equivalent in this case. Please note that the cumulative scores that include the fourth trial crosses the conventional boundary (not the alpha boundary); however, further addition of trials lead to cumulative Z-scores to reach the area of equivalence with adequate information size
Dose-response curve
To study the factors determining the comparative efficacy of dexamethasone, we studied the dose-response curve using the meta-regression modeling. We constructed a regression curve using 18 trials that reported both vomiting incidence and mean dose of dexamethasone used. As the reported dose of dexamethasone varied between 4 and 10 mg, the curve was constructed within these dose boundaries. The regression coefficient was found to be 0.21 (95% CI being 0.41 to 0.01), P = 0.04. The “tau 2 ” value for this regression was 0.041, and the heterogeneity was only 7.58%. Interestingly, the variation explainable using the mathematical modeling across the trials defined by R 2 was 100% with R 2 being 1.0 (Supplementary Fig. 1 ). This value of R 2 symbolizes that nearly all the heterogeneity seen in the pooled vomiting incidence rate can be explained on the basis of dose variation. Further, we were also able to demonstrate a linear relationship between dexamethasone dose and clinical efficacy.
We further evaluated the parameters that could quantify and compare both early and delayed antiemetic activity of drugs. These included the following.
Early nausea rate
Values were available for 13 comparisons that included 503 and 512 patients in the dexamethasone and 5-HT3 RA groups, respectively. Nausea during the first 6 h after surgery was reported by 117 patients in dexamethasone and 116 patients in the 5-HT3 RA group. The MH-Odds ratio for incidence of nausea in patient receiving dexamethasone was 1.01 (95% CI being 0.66 to 1.55), P = 0.95, I 2 = 42.86% (random-effects, Fig. 4 ). Overall nausea incidence with dexamethasone was 23.36 (95%CI being 19.78 to 27.15)% and with 5-HT3 RA was 22.66 (95%CI being 19.24 to 26.48)%. We also performed meta-regression for dose-response relation. Though a positive linear correlation was seen with dose and clinical effect (coefficient being 0.19), the modeling failed to reach a statistical significance due to small number of studies reporting the desired variables. The R 2 for the above modeling was 0.22 with a P value of 0.15. Fig. 4 Forest plot showing pooled MH-Odds ratio for incidence of vomiting during the early postoperative phase. Solid diamond at the bottom of comparison denotes the final net effect. The I 2 (heterogeneity) for this comparison was 42.86%
Trial sequential analysis for equivalence
We conducted the TSA for statistical equivalence as the P value in superiority/Inferiority analysis failed to achieve a statistical significance. The required information size for classical method was “787” and with alpha-spending boundary method was “853.” Our cumulative sample size (1015) for the comparison was well past the needed information size for both the comparisons. Also, in the TSA, the cumulative Z-score was well beyond the inner wedge of futility, thereby supporting the fact that the two interventions are statistically equal (Supplementary Fig. 2 ).
Late nausea rate
Desired values were reported in 18 subgroups that included 807 patients in dexamethasone group and 818 patients in the 5-HT3 RA group. Significant nausea was reported by 234 and 239 patients in dexamethasone and 5-HT3 RA groups, respectively. The MH-odds ratio for nausea incidence in a 24-h period with the use of dexamethasone was 0.98 (95% CI being 0.69 to 1.40), P = 0.92. The comparison had high heterogeneity value of 52.67% (Fig. 5 ). In order to explore for this heterogeneity, we performed sensitivity analysis using the “single-study removal method.” We found that all studies contributed nearly equally to this heterogeneity and the possible cause of this high value is likely to be inter-study methodological variations. The overall incidence of nausea was 29% (95%CI being 25.97 to 32.22) in dexamethasone group and 29.22% (95% CI being 26.20 to 32.43) in 5-HT3 RA group. Fig. 5 Forest plot showing pooled MH-Odds ratio for incidence of vomiting during the first 24 h after surgery. Solid diamond at the bottom of comparison denotes the final net effect. The I 2 (heterogeneity) for this comparison was 52.67%
Trial sequential analysis for equivalence
On evaluating for statistical equivalence, the cumulative Z-scores were well past the inner wedge for futility and thus interventions were statically equivalent. The total information size variable (1625) was well past the minimum requirement via conventional boundary testing (required 930) and alpha-spending boundary method (required 1023) (Supplementary Image 3 ).
Dose-response evaluation—Meta-regression could be performed using 18 subgroups that reported the relevant variables. The regression coefficient was found to be 0.26 (95%CI being 0.10 to 0.43), P = 0.002. The tau2 for above regression was 0.28 and the P value for goodness of fit for the model was 0.005. This modeling was able to explain 64% of variations seen across the pooled trials ( R 2 being 0.64) (Supplementary Fig. 4 ).
Other antiemetic efficacy parameters
We also compared other efficacy parameters such as complete response and need for rescue. Both of these parameters were also equal in both groups. The MH-odds ratio for rescue need with dexamethasone was 1.08 (95%CI being 0.61 to 1.90), P = 0.80, I 2 = 57.96 (supplementary image). The MH-odds ratio for complete response with dexamethasone was 1.11 (95%CI being 0.79 to 1.56), P = 0.55, I 2 = 44.17 (Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6 ).
Analgesic requirements
We compared the need for additional analgesics in both groups. Trials reported the comparative number of analgesic boluses required in addition to the standard analgesic regimen used in the studies. Data was available for seven comparisons that included 296 and 293 patients in dexamethasone and 5-HT3 RAs, respectively. Additional analgesic boluses were required by 87 patients receiving dexamethasone-based PONV prophylaxis and 111 patients receiving 5-HT3 RAs. The MH-odds ratio for need for additional analgesia with dexamethasone was 0.64 (95% CI being 0.44 to 0.93), P = 0.02. The heterogeneity for the above comparison was 0%. (Fig. 6 ) Additional analgesic requirement dropped from 37.88% (95% CI 32.52 to 43.56) in 5-HT3 RA group to 29.05% (95% CI being 24.18 to 34.47) as in dexamethasone group. The “number needed to treat” with the use of dexamethasone compared to 5-HT3 RA was found to be 11.78. Fig. 6 Forest plot showing pooled MH-Odds ratio for incidence of additional analgesic need during the first 24 h after surgery. Solid diamond at the bottom of comparison denotes the final net effect. The I 2 (heterogeneity) for this comparison was 0%
Assessment of publication bias
Publication bias was evaluated for the primary variables using two methods first by a funnel plot followed by Egger’s test. The possibility of publication bias was explored in the primary variable of incidence of vomiting within first 24 h after surgery. A positive publication bias was likely as Egger’s regression test showed an X-axis intercept at 1.41 with P value (two-tailed) being 0.04. A funnel plot was also constructed to review the distribution of studies across X-axis of regression test (Supplementary Fig. 7 ).
Study quality assessment
Quality assessment for bias in the included studies was carried out as per other published meta-analysis and the guidelines laid by the Cochrane Collaboration. These results are shown in Fig. 6 . We used Revman Version 5 (Cochrane Collaboration) for this evaluation and image generation (Fig. 7 ). Fig. 7 Risk of bias—summary of all analyzed studies as per the Cochrane collaboration recommendations
Discussion
Our analysis evaluated multiple parameters of antiemetic efficacy and found that dexamethasone is equivalent to the frontline 5-HT3 RAs. The results showed equivalence not only in the immediate postoperative phase but a comparable efficacy that extends into at least 24 h postoperatively. An advantage of using TSA as a mathematical tool can be clearly seen in our analysis. Many trials have reported conflicting results comparing 5-HT3 RAs to dexamethasone, leaving readers with doubts of superiority of one over the other. If a simple analysis/pooling of results is done, one cannot be sure that P value failed to achieve significance due to inadequacy of study numbers or the interventions in question are not actually superior or inferior to one another. By using TSA, we could make valid evidence-based conclusions eliminating both the above doubts and essentially highlighting the fact that additional studies also will not be able to alter this conclusion further. Another method that can be used to evaluate for equivalence is by comparing both groups against a placebo. However, individual studies that would compare dexamethasone or 5-HT3 RAs to placebo would have methodological variations and pooling would not be ideal in such situations.
Dexamethasone lowered both vomiting incidence and incidence of nausea with equal efficacy compared to 5-HT3 RAs. It is often incorrectly thought that most centrally acting anti-vomiting agents perform as well as anti-nausea agents. Interestingly, from our previous study and analysis on aprepitant (a neurokinin-1 receptor blocker), we found that this notion about centrally acting agents may not be entirely true [ , ]. Though the mechanism of action of certain agents is unclear, dexamethasone checks both boxes here to emerge as a complete antiemetic. This clinical finding of how dexamethasone is able to alleviate both nausea and vomiting incidence becomes even more important in the light of recent hypothesis that it also interacts with the neurokinin-1 receptors in the central nervous system for its antiemetic action [ ].
We were also able to quantify, a dose-response effect for vomiting incidence and late nausea incidence in our analysis. Unlike the analgesic effect of dexamethasone which was recently shown to be not directly related to dose by Waldron et al. [ ], these effects showed a clear positive correlation in dose of dexamethasone. We did find a positive correlation coefficient for other variables but failed to attain a significant P value to make any valid conclusions. This is likely to be related to lesser number of studies reporting these variables or a weaker association that requires higher sample size to attain a statistical significance. Most of the studies we evaluated used doses ranging from 4 to 8 mg and information on higher dose was limited; thus, we were not able to determine if a ceiling effect occurs and if it occurs then at what dose.
Another important finding from our analysis that supports the concurrent literature is that dexamethasone also acts as an adjuvant analgesic [ ]. The analgesic action can help provide an opioid sparing effect that may further enhance the resultant antiemetic effect seen. Alleviation of opioid requirement can decrease the emetogenic dose-dependent complication of opioids [ ]. We attempted to compare the diabetogenic effect of these agents but none of the trial reported this variable.
Our analysis has many strengths and a few limitations. One of the major strength of our analysis was that most of the pooled values had low heterogeneity. Furthermore, wherever the heterogeneity was high, we could explore and explain it based upon meta-regression or a sensitivity analysis. We only used randomized controlled trials in our analysis that further enhanced the level of evidence available. Our limitations are based on the definitions of nausea used in the included trials. Quantifying nausea is a subjective term and trials reported only “significant” nausea incidence which could have variations in interpretation across the researchers. We were not able to quantify the clinical outcomes in relation to time of dexamethasone administration as the subgrouping results failed to achieve a statistical significance. This could be related to the fact that the differences, which are minor if they exist, require a much larger sample size to become evident. The documentation of specific adverse events with both the agents compared was very inconsistent, and we were not able to compare/analyze these incidences. Additionally, the type of surgery varied across trials, and this component could have added to the heterogeneity. We attempted to perform a subgroup analysis based upon the time of dexamethasone administration. However, we were unable to do this due to disproportionate distribution of studies in subgroups and inconsistent reporting a meaning full pooling was not possible.
Conclusion
Dexamethasone demonstrates equal antiemetic efficacy compared to 5-HT3 receptor antagonists. The agents perform equally well both in early postoperative phase and up to 24 h after surgery. Use of dexamethasone replacing 5-HT3 RAs offers an additional advantage of lowering the opioid requirements during the perioperative period.