Focus on heart failure: dual-acting angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor—sacubitril/valsartan
Sacubitril/valsartan (LCZ696) is a new agent indicated for the treatment of symptomatic chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) [ ]. This novel drug is a combination of the moieties of valsartan and sacubitril (neprilysin inhibitor) in a single substance. On the one hand, valsartan inhibits the detrimental cardiovascular and renal effects of angiotensin II by selective blocking of the AT1 receptor and additionally inhibits the release of angiotensin II-dependent aldosterone. On the other hand, sacubitril/valsartan acts on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-system (RAAS), by the action of LBQ657, the active metabolite of the pro-drug sacubitril, inhibiting neprilysin, a neutral endopeptidase that would typically cleave natriuretic peptides (NP), which include atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), and C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) [ ]. High circulating NP levels exert physiologic effects by activation of guanylcycline membrane receptors, resulting in augmented generation of the second messenger of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), which may result in enhancing diuresis and natriuresis, vasodilation and myocardial relaxation, reduction of sympathetic activity, and antihypertrophic, antifibrotic, and anti-remodeling effects (Fig. 1 ) [ , , , ]. Fig. 1 Sacubitril/valsartan mechanism of action in heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. ACE angiotensin converting enzyme, ANP atrial natriuretic peptide, ARBs angiotensin receptor blockers AT1 angiotensin II receptor type 1, BNP brain natriuretic peptide, CNP C-type natriuretic peptide, NPs natriuretic peptides, RAAS renin angiotensin aldosterone system
The long-term effects of sacubitril/valsartan on morbidity and mortality in patients with HFrEF were compared with the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI), enalapril in the multinational, randomized, double-blind phase III trial—PARADGIM-HF. This clinical trial revealed a superior efficacy of sacubitril/valsartan over enalapril, with a significant decrease in the endpoints of cardiovascular death and hospitalization due to heart failure [ ]. Consequently, sacubitril/valsartan has been included as a class I drug for HFrEF, recommended in the last European guidelines for patients with HFrEF who fit the profile of patients included in the PARADIGM-HF trial [ ].
Regarding the safety of sacubitril/valsartan, some relevant issues should be considered before initiating this new drug in clinical practice. During the PARADIGM-HF trial, the most frequently reported adverse reactions were hypotension, hyperkalemia, and renal impairment. As such, the use of sacubitril/valsartan is contraindicated in patients with low systolic blood pressure (< 112 mmHg), hyperkalemia (serum potassium levels > 5.4 mmol/L), or renal impairment (estimated glomerular filtration rate < 60 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) [ , , ]. In the PARADIGM-HF trial, angioedema was reported in 0.5% of sacubitril/valsartan-treated patients compared with 0.2% of enalapril-treated patients [ ]. Of note, the highest incidence of angioedema was observed in black patients treated with sacubitril/valsartan (2.4%) and enalapril (0.5%) and the number of African American patients in this study was relatively small [ ].
Although the PARADIGM-HF trial projected sacubitril/valsartan as a major advancement in the treatment of HFrEF compared to the current treatment with ACEI and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), there is an additional concern about safety regarding this new drug. It has been suggested that neprilysin inhibition may favor the development of Alzheimer dementia, since the proteolysis of beta-amyloid peptide in the brain requires neprilysin, and its inhibition could theoretically accelerate amyloid deposition. However, this possible adverse effect has not been assessed in the PARADIGM-HF trial [ , ].
Long-term safety of the new drug sacubitril/valsartan still needs to be addressed.
Focus on cardiovascular prevention: hypercholesterolemia management in the era of PCSK9 inhibitors
Hypercholesterolemia is a major risk factor for developing cardiovascular disease. Statins are the standard lipid-lowering therapy to decrease lower-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality [ ]. Inhibition of hydroxymethyl glutaryl coenzyme A reductase (HMG-CoA) by statins decreases cholesterol synthesis and upregulates cellular LDL-receptors. Therefore, statins reduce the LDL-C plasma concentration and may halt progression or even contribute to regression of atherosclerosis [ ]. However, there are few options for patients who are either intolerant to statins, do not reach the LDL-C goal or develop cardiovascular disease despite being on maximal tolerated dose of statins, or have severe hypercholesterolemia [ , ]. In the SPUM-ACS trial, only 30% of these high-risk patients achieved the target LDL-C goal [ ]. Although statins are the recommended first-line therapy, additional complementary pharmacologic approaches may be necessary to achieve LDL-C level goals and reduce cardiovascular events.
PCSK9-inhibitors: beyond statin therapy
Monoclonal antibodies that inhibit the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) have emerged as a promising option in hyperlipidemia management. These novel drugs provide an impressive reduction of LDL and an encouraging outcome benefit.
PCSK9 plays an essential role in regulating cholesterol homeostasis [ , ]. PCSK9 binds to low-density lipoprotein receptors (LDL-R) present on the cell, with the purpose of regulating the level of plasmatic LDL-C. LDL-C is removed from plasma via LDL-R-mediated endocytosis; within the cell, the LDL-C particle dissociates from the receptor, where it is eliminated by lysosome activity; the LDL-R is recycled to the hepatocyte surface [ , ]. When PCSK9 binds to LDL-R, they are degraded in lysosomes without being recycled, lowering the number of cell surface LDL-R and the capacity to remove LDL-C from the circulation [ ]. As a result, LDL-C accumulates in the blood.
Two fully human monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to target PCSK9 are currently licensed for clinical use: evolocumab and alirocumab. They are fully human mAbs that bind selectively and with high affinity to PCSK9, preventing it from binding to the LDL-R and inhibiting internationalization of the PCSK9-LDL-R complex and consequently reduce plasma LDL-C dramatically [ ]. GLAGOV is a phase II study showing that evolocumab reduces LDL-C up to 60–70% and also evidenced that anti-PCSK9 therapies lead to atherosclerotic plaque regression [ ]. The FOURIER trial, the first cardiovascular outcomes trial, tested the clinical efficacy and safety of evolocumab when added to high-intensity or moderate-intensity statin therapy in patients with clinically evident atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. This trial demonstrated significant reductions in cardiovascular events in a population with stable cardiovascular disease over a 2-year period (Table 1 ). However, there was no significant difference in mortality between patients treated with evolocumab or standard lipid-lowering therapy [ ]. FOURIER is a remarkable study, likely to impact clinical guidelines and change practice patterns, as it presents the possibility of safely reducing LDL-C to unprecedented low levels. Table 1 Clinical trials regarding PCSK9 inhibitors on coronary artery disease Odyssey long term (alirocumab) [ ] Fourier (evolocumab) [ ] Orion-1 (inclisiran) [ ] Sample size N = 2341 N = 27,564 N = 501 Baseline LDL-c Mean 123 ± 43 mg/dL Median 92 mg/dL Mean 129 ± 51 mg/dL Coronary disease Coronary heart disease 68–70% Prior myocardial infarction 81% Previous atherosclerotic CV disease 55–77% Mean follow-up 80.9/80.1 weeks (alirocumab/placebo) 2.2 years N/A Difference in LDL-c level − 62% ( p < 0.001) (at 24 weeks) − 59% ( p < 0.001) (at 48 weeks) − 35.5 to 52.6% ( p < 0.001) (at 180 days) CV outcome 2% absolute reduction in death from coronary heart disease, nonfatal MI, stroke, or hospitalization for UA 1.5% absolute reduction in CV death, MI, stroke, hospitalization for UA, or coronary revascularization N/A CV , cardiovascular; LDL-c , low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; MI , myocardial infarction; N/A , not applicable; UA , unstable angina
Concerning alirocumab, studies like CHOICEII and ODYSSEY ALTERNATIVE trial evaluating patients with statin intolerance showed a decrease in LDL-C by 56% comparing with placebo [ ] (Table 1 ). The ODYSSEY OUTCOMES study is expected to be presented in 2018 and will provide cardiovascular outcome data in a post-acute coronary syndrome population.
A third PCSK9-inhibitor, bococizumab, was compared with placebo in two randomized trials, demonstrating a significant reduction in major cardiovascular events in the SPIRE-2 trial, involving high-risk patients. However, these significant effects have not been detected in the previous SPIRE-1 trial with lower-risk patients [ ]. Additionally, the phase III trials of bococizumab showed high immunogenicity and high injection-site reactions leading to the discontinuation of its development [ , ].
The PCSK9-inhibitors were generally found to be well tolerated, having a safety profile comparable with placebo. Importantly, treatment with evolocumab did not result in a significant increase of new-onset diabetes or worsening of cognitive function because of very low LDL-C levels [ ]. Similarly, alirocumab therapy was not associated with development of diabetes or exacerbation of the disease, but neurocognitive disorders (mainly related to memory) occurred more frequently with alirocumab than placebo [ ]. Data from the EBBINGHAUS study, a cognitive substudy of patients enrolled in FOURIER, is expected in 2018.
Regarding suitability of this new class of lipid-lowering drugs, they present the inconvenience of an invasive route of administration, requiring around 12–26 subcutaneous injections per year [ , ].
Available evidence suggests that PCSK9 inhibitors are highly effective and safe and may now be considered in high cardiovascular risk patients who fail to achieve the LDL-C target despite high dose statin therapy or who cannot tolerate statin therapy due to side effects. Nevertheless, large trials with longer follow-up and cost-effectiveness data are warranted to confirm the real benefit of PCSK9 inhibitors and to define which patients could benefit from these expensive new drugs.
PCSK9 inhibition targeting the PCSK9 messenger RNA
An alternative approach to reducing PCSK9 is to inhibit translation of the messenger RNA for PCSK9. Inclisiran is a chemically synthesized small interfering RNA that inhibits the synthesis of PCSK9 mRNA [ ]. This promising RNA-based therapy has similar efficacy to mAbs, but with a much longer duration of action. The phase 2 ORION-1 study suggested that inclisiran reduces PCSK9, producing time averaged reductions in LDL cholesterol of 50% over 9 months among patients at high cardiovascular risk [ ] (Table 1 ). Injection-site reactions occurred in 5% of the patients who received injections of inclisiran [ ]. The ORION-4 cardiovascular outcome trial will assess the cardiovascular benefits of two injections per year using inclisiran.
Focus on arrhythmias
Reversal agents for non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is one of the major causes of stroke and cardiovascular morbidity in the world [ ]. Oral anticoagulation (OAC) with vitamin K antagonists (VKAs) or NOACs significantly reduces stroke and mortality in AF patients [ ]. The new generation of oral anticoagulants, NOACs, targets a single factor of the coagulation cascade with a predictable dose-response relationship and without the need for routine monitoring and fewer drug–drug and/or food–drug interactions compared to VKAs [ ]. There is strong cumulative evidence from randomized clinical trials and registries supporting that NOACs have an overall favorable risk-benefit profile compared with VKAs, with a significantly lower risk of intracranial hemorrhage [ , ].
Currently, there are four NOACs available for stroke prevention in non-valvular AF. Dabigatran specifically and reversibly inhibits both free and clot-bound thrombin by binding to the active site of the thrombin molecule [ , ]. Rivaroxaban specifically binds to the active site of factor Xa (FXa) within the prothrombinase complex, suppressing the generation of new thrombin molecules in plasma. However, rivaroxaban has no significant effect on existing thrombin activity, leaving thrombin available to facilitate primary hemostasis [ ]. Apixaban and edoxaban are direct inhibitors of FXa that inhibit both free and cell-bound FXa and activated prothrombinase [ ].
Data from the GARFIELD-AF observational study of the general population in 17,612 patients showed that the use of VKAs declined, and the use of NOACs increased about 15% between 2010 and 2015. The widespread use of NOACs has resulted in the need for rapid-acting reversal agents in critical situations such as life-threatening bleeding or urgent surgical interventions [ ]. Despite multiple clinical trials and meta-analyses showing that NOACs have a significantly better safety profile than VKAs, with lower rates of overall bleeding (including major and non-major but clinically relevant hemorrhage) [ , ], lack of a specific reversal agent has led to a certain degree of physician insecurity in prescribing NOACs, particularly since many have broader experience in treating patients with VKAs and treating bleeding complications in this scenario with fresh frozen plasma and vitamin K.
Up until recently, management of bleeding complications in patients on NOACs had been mostly supportive, including discontinuation of the drug, control of the bleeding site, blood-derived products, antifibrinolytic agents, and plasma factors [ , ]. However, recent years have seen the development of several specific reversal agents for NOACs: 1. Idarucizumab—this humanized monoclonal antibody fragment, which binds dabigatran with extremely high affinity (350 times as high as thrombin) [ ], was the first reversal agent to be approved in most countries for patients requiring urgent surgery or presenting with life-threatening bleeding [ ]. Results from the Phase III RE-VERSE AD trial show that it provides full and irreversible reversal of dabigatran’s procoagulant effects within minutes, when administered at the dose of 5 g intravenous (two 2.5-g bolus infusions administered less than 15 min apart) [ ] (Table 2 ). 2. Andexanet alfa—a recombinant, truncated form of factor Xa that binds and neutralizes the activity of all the factor Xa inhibitors (rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban), while also neutralizing indirect Xa inhibitors (low-molecular-weight heparin and fondaparinux) [ , ]. A bolus-dose followed by an intravenous infusion is capable of reversing the effect of these drugs within minutes [ ] (Table 2 ). Phase III studies are underway to test the efficacy and safety of Andexanet alfa in patients anticoagulated with rivaroxaban and apixaban. It is currently under review by the Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency. 3. Ciraparantag (PER977)—a small synthetic cationic molecule designed to bind to all available NOACs (both factor Xa and IIa inhibitors), as well as heparing-based anticoagulants (including unfractioned heparin and low-molecular-weight heparin) [ , ]. Ciraparantag has been studied in patients on therapeutic doses of edoxaban, and demonstrated complete reversal of its effect within 10 min of the administration of a single dose of the reversal agent, with sustained effect for 24 h and no evidence of procoagulant activity [ ] (Table 2 ). Results from phase III trials are expected soon. Table 2 Summary of reversal agents for NOACs Idarucizumab [ ] Andexanet alfa [ ] Cirapantag [ ] Target Dabigatran Factor Xa inhibitors (rivaroxaban, apixaban, edoxaban) All NOACs, heparin Mechanism of action Humanized monoclonal antibody fragment Recombinant truncated form of factor Xa Synthetic cationic molecule Dosing 2 2.5-g IV boluses (15 min apart) 400-mg bolus ± 2-h infusion (4 mg/min) 100 mg IV (single dose) Regulatory approval Approved in most countries Pending approval N/A IV , intravenous; N/A , not applicable; NOACs , non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants
Results regarding the use of reversal agents for NOACs are likely to impact current management strategies for bleeding events and emergent procedures. Not only will the prompt availability of reversal strategies increase the safety of patients under NOAC therapy, it is also likely to improve clinician confidence in initiating oral anticoagulation in patients with significant bleeding risk, which will hopefully lead to a higher proportion of such patients with proper protection against ischemic events such as cardioembolic stroke.
Secondary prevention in patients with embolic strokes of undetermined source
Embolic stroke of undetermined source (ESUS) is a recently proposed classification for non-lacunar ischemic strokes where the embolic source remains unclear, after exclusion of large vessel atherosclerosis and investigation regarding a potential cardioembolic cause (including a 12-lead ECG, echocardiography study, and Holter) [ , ]. It is estimated to account for 16% of all ischemic strokes [ ], grouping a multitude of different potential stroke etiologies that share a higher risk for thromboembolic events. As such, it has been speculated that anticoagulants could potentially play a role in secondary stroke prevention in ESUS patients, seeing as stroke recurrence rates remain high in patients medicated with aspirin [ ].
The phase III NAVIGATE-ESUS study was a multicenter double-blinded trial that randomized over 7000 patients to either rivaroxaban 15 mg once daily or the standard of care of aspirin 100 mg once daily, testing the primary hypothesis that rivaroxaban would be superior in reducing recurrent stroke and systemic embolism [ ]. However, following an interim analysis that showed comparable efficacy in both arms, it was announced that the trial would be halted prematurely, due to a very small likelihood that the rivaroxaban arm would show overall benefit.
Stroke prevention in this subgroup of patients remains challenging, and whether NOACs could be superior to antiplatelet therapy remains unclear. Data from the RE-SPECT ESUS and ATTICUS trials, comparing dabigatran and apixaban with aspirin in a similar setting respectively, could help clarify this issue.
Focus on coronary artery disease
Supplemental oxygen in acute myocardial infarction: yes or no?
Routine oxygen administration to patients who present with a suspected acute myocardial infarction is still common in clinical practice, following the theoretical rationale that supplemental oxygen would diminish myocardial injury. However, no robust data has ever supported the use of oxygen in non-hypoxic patients. A 2015 meta-analysis showed no difference in in-hospital mortality and infarction extent when comparing patients randomized to room air or titrated oxygen versus high-concentration oxygen [ ]. Furthermore, the Air Versus Oxygen in ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction (AVOID) trial evaluated oxygen supplementation in non-hypoxic STEMI patients and concluded that oxygen supplementation was associated with larger infarctions, as well as higher rates of recurrent myocardial infarction (MI) [ ]. Proposed mechanisms for deleterious effects of oxygen include the formation of reactive oxygen species, reduced coronary blood flow, increased vascular resistance, and reperfusion injury [ , , ].
The DETO2X-AMI Trial proposed to evaluate the systematic administration of oxygen to non-hypoxic patients who presented with a suspected acute MI. In this multicenter, randomized controlled trial, 6629 patients with recent onset of chest pain or shortness of breath and either elevated cardiac troponin levels or electrocardiographic signs of hypoxia, with an oxygen saturation of 90% or higher, were randomized to receive either ambient air or supplemental oxygen, delivered through an open face mask at 6 l per minute.
The primary endpoint of all-cause mortality at 1 year did not differ significantly between patients assigned to oxygen or ambient air. The secondary endpoints of rehospitalization for MI, heart failure, and cardiovascular deaths were also similar in both groups at 30 and 365 days, and the extent of the infarction, evaluated by peak high-sensitivity troponin T levels during hospitalization, was also similar in both study groups [ ].
The DETO2X-AMI Trial showed that systematic oxygen administration to patients with suspected acute MI who did not present with hypoxemia had no effect on all-cause mortality at 1 year or rehospitalization due to MI. These results led to a more conservative approach in the 2017 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute myocardial infarction in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation, which now propose oxygen supplementation only if oxygen saturation is lower than 90% in STEMI patients (as opposed to the 95% threshold recommended in the previous guidelines) [ ].
Canakinumab—the first drug targeting systemic inflammation showing reduction in cardiovascular events
Even though current therapy for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease focuses on conventional risk factors, namely lipid-lowering therapy, experimental and clinical evidence points towards an important role of inflammation in the development and progression of atherogenesis. Statin therapy seems to reduce the rate of cardiovascular events in both primary and secondary prevention regardless of its effects on the lipid profile, with evidence suggesting important anti-inflammatory effects [ ]. Patients with pro-inflammatory states, as defined by persistently elevated high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) levels, seem to have a higher risk of cardiovascular events than their counterparts [ ]. However, there is still scarce data on whether treatments that specifically target inflammatory pathways can halt the progression of atherosclerosis and improve cardiovascular outcomes.
Canakinumab (ACZ885; Ilaris, Novartis) is a fully humanized recombinant monoclonal antibody, previously used in patients with several rheumatologic disorders, that selectively neutralizes interleukin-1β, a cytokine that regulates the interleukin-6 signaling pathway [ , ], promoting an inflammatory response (through leukocyte recruitment and adhesion, vascular smooth-muscle cell growth, induction of pro-thrombotic activity, among others) [ , ]. The CANTOS trial (Canakinumab Anti-Inflammatory Thrombosis Outcome Study) sought to evaluate whether canakinumab would be able to prevent recurrent cardiovascular events, in post-myocardial infarction patients with a documented pro-inflammatory status, defined as a serum hs-CRP of ≥ 2 mg/dL, despite optimized medical therapy for coronary artery disease. Over 10,000 patients were enrolled in this phase III event-driven trial, and were randomly assigned to receive placebo or canakinumab at a dose of 50, 150, or 300 mg, administered subcutaneously every 3 months.
Patients on canakinumab exhibited lowered levels of hs-CRP in a dose-dependent fashion, with a median reduction that was 26, 37, and 41% higher than placebo in the 50-, 150-, and 300-mg groups respectively, after 48 months of therapy. Median follow-up was 3.7 years, and the event rate per 100 person-years was 4.5 in the placebo group versus 4.11, 3.86, and 3.90 in the 50-, 150-, and 300-mg groups, respectively, though only the 150-mg dose achieved a significant reduction, with a hazard ratio of 0.85 for the primary endpoint (a composite of nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, or cardiovascular death). Regarding the secondary endpoints of the study, the 150-mg dose group showed a lower rate of nonfatal MI, and both the 150- and 300-mg dose groups had a reduced incidence of cardiovascular mortality and hospitalization due to unstable angina requiring urgent revascularization. These effects seem to be independent from lipid modification, since LDL levels were not significantly lower in patients on canakinumab [ ].
Safety-wise, patients medicated with canakinumab exhibited higher incidence rates of neutropenia and, consequently, a higher risk of fatal infection and sepsis. Thrombocytopenia was also more frequent in patients on canakinumab, despite no significant increase in bleeding risk. Canakinumab was well tolerated, with similar rates of injection-site reactions to those in the placebo group. Interestingly, there was also a reported reduction in cancer mortality, mainly in lung cancer, suggesting that interleukin-1β is involved in the development and progression of certain types of tumors [ ].
Canakinumab therapy was indeed effective in reducing recurrent cardiovascular events, but with a higher incidence rate of fatal infections and sepsis. Besides, it is still unclear which subgroups of patients with previous atherothrombotic events would benefit from specific anti-inflammatory therapy, and whether these drugs will enter the realm of cardiovascular therapy is still an uncertainty. Regardless, the findings from the CANTOS trial further power the hypothesis that inflammatory pathways have an important role in the atherosclerotic process, opening the way for new investigation regarding different targets in the immune-inflammatory cascade in cardiovascular disease.
Rivaroxaban for coronary artery disease
Despite the established role of aspirin monotherapy for secondary prevention in patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, this population remains at a high risk for recurrent cardiovascular events despite optimized medical therapy [ , ]. Oral anticoagulants in addition to standard antithrombotic therapy may reduce recurrent ischemic events and improve global outcomes, but this theoretical benefit must be balanced against the increased risk of major hemorrhage. Previous meta-analyses have suggested a reduction in all-cause mortality and recurrent cardiovascular events when vitamin K antagonists are added to standard antiplatelet therapy [ , ], at the expense of an increased rate of major bleeds, including intracranial hemorrhage [ ]. Non-vitamin K oral anticoagulants have also been studied following an acute coronary syndrome with conflicting results [ ]. A trial of apixaban at a dose of 5 mg twice daily added to antiplatelet therapy significantly increased the risk of major bleeding without improvement of the efficacy outcomes [ ]. In the ATLAS ACS 2-TIMI 51 trial, low doses of rivaroxaban (so-called vascular doses ) have also been tested in this setting, as adjuvants of standard therapy, and seemed to reduce the rate of ischemic events while increasing the risk of major but nonfatal bleeding [ ].
The Cardiovascular Outcomes for People Using Anticoagulation Strategies (COMPASS) trial sought to evaluate whether this benefit of rivaroxaban could be extrapolated to patients with stable atherosclerotic disease. As such, this double-blind trial enrolled 27,395 patients in an intention-to-treat fashion, and randomized them to rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily plus aspirin, rivaroxaban 5 mg twice daily alone, or aspirin alone, in the setting of stable atherosclerotic disease (be that documented coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease, or both). After a mean follow-up of 23 months, an interim efficacy evaluation by the independent data and safety monitoring board led to an early termination of the trial due to superiority of the rivaroxaban plus aspirin arm. Indeed, when compared to aspirin alone, the primary composite outcome of cardiovascular death, stroke, or MI was significantly lower in the rivaroxaban plus aspirin group (4.1 versus 5.4%, HR 0.76, p < 0.001), resulting in a 1.3% absolute risk reduction. As expected, the risk of bleeding events was increased with the combination of rivaroxaban and aspirin compared to aspirin alone (3.1 versus 1.9%, HR 1.70, p < 0.001, which represents an increase of 1.2% in absolute risk), though there was no significant difference regarding fatal or intracranial hemorrhage. The risk of all-cause mortality and cardiovascular death was also reduced with the combination of rivaroxaban and aspirin, and a net clinical benefit outcome that evaluated both thrombotic and hemorrhagic events (consisting of cardiovascular death, stroke, myocardial infarction, fatal bleeding, or symptomatic bleeding into a critical organ) also favored this group. These findings were consistent among patients with coronary artery disease or peripheral artery disease, and across all other prespecified subgroups [ , ].
The comparison of rivaroxaban alone with aspirin alone, on the other hand, resulted in a higher risk of bleeding events in the rivaroxaban arm (2.8 versus 1.9%, HR 1.51, p < 0.001) without any significant improvement regarding the primary efficacy outcome or net clinical benefit outcome [ ].
This trial shined new light on the role of oral anticoagulation in preventing thrombotic events in patients with established atherosclerotic disease. The addition of low-dose rivaroxaban to standard aspirin treatment resulted in better thrombotic outcomes and reduced all-cause mortality at the expense of an increased risk of hemorrhage events in similar proportions. Real-life clinical applicability of these results is still to be determined and, for the time being, whether the trade-off of ischemic versus bleeding risk is worthwhile will have to be determined on an individual patient basis.
Conclusion
The year 2017 has seen significant progress in the pharmacological treatment of heart failure, coronary artery disease, and hypercholesterolemia. In this paper, we have highlighted and discussed the key clinical studies recently published in the field of cardiovascular pharmacology. Many of these studies may contribute to future updating of practice guidelines and may lead to the development of new therapeutic strategies.