Introduction
Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severe and persistent mental illness associated with significant morbidity and mortality, with an estimated life expectancy of 10 to 20 years shorter than the general population (Kessing et al. ). Pharmacological interventions are the primary modality of treatment for BD (Grande et al. ). Unfortunately, however, currently available pharmacological treatments are associated with high rates of treatment resistance with frequent relapses and recurrences, along with poor tolerability and safety profiles (e.g., metabolic syndrome, nephrotoxicity) (Miura et al. ). In a 15-year BD follow-up study, patients were symptomatically ill 47.3% of the total follow-up time with depressive symptoms (31.9% of total follow-up time) predominating over manic/hypomanic symptoms (8.9% of total follow-up time) or cycling/mixed symptoms (5.9% of total follow-up time) (Judd et al. ). As such, treatments with greater mood-stabilizing efficacy and improved tolerability are urgently needed. To improve treatment outcomes, identifying novel targets implicated in the pathophysiology of BD is essential, as current drug targets have yielded unacceptably poor clinical outcomes.
The pathophysiology and etiology of BD remains poorly understood with no unifying hypothesis to explain the onset and progression of illness. Further, as a heterogeneous illness, there is unlikely to be a single underlying etiology common to all individuals with BD (Berk et al. ). Over the past decade, replicated and converging evidence has demonstrated that immune dysfunction plays a key role in the onset and progression of BD in a significant subgroup of individuals (Rosenblat and McIntyre ). The inflammatory nature of BD was initially suggested by Horrobin and Lieb ( ), suggesting that fluctuating immune activity may be a trigger for manic and depressive episodes, akin to pro-inflammatory changes causing flare-ups in multiple sclerosis (MS) and other immune disorders. They further hypothesized that immune modulation may be a key mechanism of action sub-serving the mood-stabilizing effects of lithium, which continues to be one of the most effective treatments for BD (Selle et al. ).
The immune hypothesis of BD received further support by the replicated epidemiological observation that BD is associated with increased rates of inflammatory comorbidities, including but not limited to: autoimmune disorders (MS, inflammatory bowel disease (IBS), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), autoimmune thyroiditis, Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), autoimmune hepatitis, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriasis) (Eaton et al. ); cardiovascular disease (coronary artery disease, cerebral vascular accidents, hypertension) (Goldstein et al. ); metabolic disorders (central obesity, dyslipidemia, metabolic syndrome, gout, insulin resistance) (McElroy and Keck ); and chronic infections ( Toxoplasma gondii ) (Sutterland et al. ). The high rates of comorbidity between BD and inflammatory conditions is suggestive of immune dysfunction as a common underlying factor leading to both BD and medical comorbidities (Rosenblat and McIntyre ).
Additionally, over 30 studies have definitively shown that BD is associated with elevated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (Modabbernia et al. ; Barbosa et al. ). Illness phase-specific changes in cytokine levels remain unclear as there is a paucity of longitudinal studies evaluating cytokine levels throughout the illness course (Brietzke et al. ). Nevertheless, numerous meta-analyses have demonstrated elevated serum levels of pro-inflammatory molecules including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R), interleukin-1 beta (IL-1B), interleukin-6 (IL-6), soluble receptor of TNF-type 1 (STNFR1), and C-reactive protein (CRP) in BD compared to healthy controls, indicative of chronic low-grade inflammation secondary to dysfunction of the innate immune system (Kim et al. ; Modabbernia et al. ; Barbosa et al. ). Additionally, elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines have been associated with greater BD symptom burden (Hope et al. ; Köhler-Forsberg et al. ).
Numerous mechanisms have been identified that may trans-diagnostically mediate the inflammatory-mood pathway. These mechanisms, along with their supporting evidence, have been extensively reviewed elsewhere (Stertz et al. ; Raison and Miller ; Rosenblat et al. ; Rosenblat and McIntyre ). In brief, pro-inflammatory cytokines may actively and passively cross the blood-brain-barrier, directly activating microglia, leading to aberrant neuronal apoptosis, pruning key neural circuits associated with emotional regulation and cognitive function, and leading to mood symptoms and cognitive dysfunction (Stertz et al. ; Rosenblat et al. ). Additionally, pro-inflammatory cytokines may directly and indirectly alter monoamine levels and perturb the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis leading to hypercortisolemia and resultant mood symptoms (Miller et al. ). More recently, the role of the gut-microbiota has been implicated whereby pro-inflammatory effects of microbiota abnormalities may facilitate negative mood and cognitive effects via the gut-brain axis (Cryan and Dinan ; Alam et al. ).
With growing and converging evidence implicating immune dysfunction in mood disorders, numerous investigators have evaluated the effects of anti-inflammatory agents in the treatment of BD (Rosenblat et al. ). The objective of the current review is to summarize and synthesize clinical studies evaluating the effects of anti-inflammatory agents in BD during all illness phases. The results of these clinical trials may further our understanding of the pathophysiology of BD (i.e., further testing the immune hypothesis), as well as potentially identify specific agents that may eventually be translated in clinical practice to improve treatment outcomes of BD. Our group and others have previously reviewed this topic (Rosenblat et al. ; Husain et al. ); however, the current review provides an update, as the field is rapidly growing with additional clinical trials recently completed. In addition, the current review strives to synthesize the available data in a more understandable and integrated way. Also of note, while the focus of the current review is BD, numerous clinical trials have also evaluated the effects of anti-inflammatories in other psychiatric disorders, such as major depressive disorder (MDD) (Kohler et al. ; Husain et al. ) and schizophrenia (Nitta et al. ), given the transdiagnostic effects of immune dysfunction (Goldsmith et al. ).
Methods
For this narrative review, the PubMed/Medline and Google Scholar databases were searched from inception to August 27, 2018. The search was limited to human studies, including clinical trials, observational studies, meta-analyses, and review articles, written in the English language using the following search string: (bipolar depression OR bipolar disorder OR BD OR mania OR hypomania OR mixed) AND (inflammation OR immune dysfunction OR anti-inflammatory OR celecoxib OR non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs OR NSAIDS OR NAC OR N-acetylcysteine OR omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids OR pioglitazone OR infliximab OR biologics OR tumor necrosis factor (TNF) OR interleukin OR cytokine OR probiotics OR minocycline OR curcumin OR Coenzyme Q10 OR CoQ10). Reference lists from identified articles were manually searched for additional relevant studies.
Clinical studies (including open label clinical trials, RCTs, and retrospective studies) evaluating the effects of anti-inflammatory agents (including agents that are not classified as “anti-inflammatory drugs” but are known to have significant anti-inflammatory properties, such as minocycline and pioglitazone) in BD, during any illness phase (e.g., including studies in acute mania and depression, as well as maintenance studies), were qualitatively reviewed. Notably, only agents with replicated evidence for clinically significant anti-inflammatory effects, as verified by changes in inflammatory markers, were included, as many other agents have been suggested to have anti-inflammatory effects with unknown clinical significance or magnitude of effects. While there are numerous studies evaluating anti-inflammatory agents in other psychiatric illnesses (e.g., depressive symptoms, MDD, schizophrenia) (Nitta et al. ; Kohler et al. ; Husain et al. ), the current review was limited to studies in BD. Studies including a mixture of diagnoses were reviewed if a significant proportion of participants had a diagnosis of BD.
Of note, a quantitative analysis (e.g., meta-analysis) was not conducted as there was deemed to be an inadequate number of new RCTs since the publication of previous meta-analyses (Rosenblat et al. ; Husain et al. ) to justify a re-analysis at this time. Further, the goal of the current review was not to exhaustively and systematically review in depth details of all clinical studies, as has been previously done by our group and others (Rosenblat and McIntyre ; Rosenblat et al. ; Husain et al. ), but rather, to qualitatively synthesize study results in a clear and understandable way for both clinicians and researchers to easily appreciate the current status of evidence for anti-inflammatories in BD.
Results
Class effect of anti-inflammatories in BD: results from previous meta-analyses
The first meta-analysis evaluating the effects of targeting the immune system in BD specifically assessed the acute antidepressant effects of agents with anti-inflammatory properties (Rosenblat et al. ). In this meta-analysis, eight RCTs ( n = 312) assessing adjunctive non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) ( n = 53), omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (omega-3 s) ( n = 140), N-acetylcysteine (NAC) ( n = 76), and pioglitazone ( n = 44) in the treatment of bipolar depression were identified. The overall effect size (i.e., standard mean difference (SMD)) of adjunctive anti-inflammatories on depressive symptom severity was − 0.40 (95% confidence interval − 0.14 to − 0.65 ( P = 0.002)), indicative of a moderate and statistically significant antidepressant effect. Heterogeneity of the pooled sample was low ( I 2 = 14%; P = 0.32). No significant treatment emergent adverse events or manic switches were reported. The primary limitation of this meta-analysis was that the overall pooled sample size was small ( n = 312). However, these early results suggested a potential class effect whereby medications with anti-inflammatory properties, with diverse mechanisms of action, may have an antidepressant effect in BD.
A more recent meta-analysis evaluated the effects of anti-inflammatory agents in mood disorders (including both MDD and BD) during all illness phases (Husain et al. ). In assessing antidepressant effects of adjunctive anti-inflammatory agents, a moderate to large SMD of − 0.71 (95% CI − 1.24 to − 0.17; n = 214; P = 0.009) was found. Of the six RCTs included in this analysis, three RCTs were in BD samples assessing the effects of adjunctive NSAIDs (Nery et al. ; Saroukhani et al. ) and NAC (Berk et al. ). This meta-analysis also evaluated the anti-manic effects of anti-inflammatories (specifically NSAIDs and NAC), pooling the results of three RCTs, showing a significant reduction of post-treatment manic symptom scores with an SMD of − 0.72 (95% CI − 1.31 to − 0.13; P = 0.02; n = 96). Therefore, this meta-analysis also supported a potential antidepressant and anti-manic effect of adjunctive anti-inflammatories (specifically NAC and NSAIDs), however, was also limited by the small pooled sample sizes, especially in evaluating anti-manic effects ( n = 96). Notably, this meta-analysis included fewer studies compared to the previous meta-analysis (Rosenblat et al. ), as Husain et al. restricted their search to NSAIDs and NAC, whereas Rosenblat et al. used a broader definition of anti-inflammatories, including agents such as omega-3s, minocycline, and pioglitazone, all of which have demonstrated clinically significant anti-inflammatory effects.
Taken together, meta-analytic level data has revealed promising results for targeting the immune system in the treatment of BD. However, available data is still very limited, thus meriting further investigation. Moreover, to influence clinical recommendations, establishing the efficacy, safety and tolerability of specific agents is required, rather than assuming a class effect of all anti-inflammatory agents. As such, herein we summarize the evidence for individual anti-inflammatory agents in the treatment of BD.
Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
Omega-3s are naturally occurring anti-inflammatory molecules that compete with arachidonic acid, thereby decreasing the production of pro-inflammatory eicosanoids. Given their anti-inflammatory effects, omega-3s have been investigated for effects in numerous medical and psychiatric disorders, including BD (McNamara and Strawn ; Grosso et al. ). The use of omega-3s has been of particular interest given the demonstrated anti-inflammatory effects, with a positive safety and tolerability profile, along with low propensity to interact with other medications (McNamara and Strawn ). As omega-3s initially yielded positive results in MDD (Bloch and Hannestad ), many investigators assumed the same effects would be observed in BD; however, to date, RCTs assessing omega-3s in BD have yielded mixed results (Montgomery and Richardson ).
The majority of RCTs evaluating antidepressant effects of adjunctive omega-3s in BD have yielded negative results (Hirashima et al. ; Keck et al. ; Frangou et al. ; Gracious et al. ) with only two small RCTs (Stoll et al. ; Frangou et al. ) and one small open-label study (Osher et al. ) reporting significant antidepressive effects in BD. Meta-analytic pooling of these results revealed a small to moderate effect size (0.34; n = 291; P = 0.029) in favor of omega-3s; however, meta-regression analysis revealed that studies with smaller sample sizes had larger effect sizes ( P = 0.05), suggestive of publication bias (Sarris et al. ). Moreover, the largest and most rigorous RCT ( n = 118) demonstrated no significant differences on any outcome measures between the adjunctive omega-3 and adjunctive placebo groups (Keck et al. ).
Notably, these previous RCTs of omega-3s for bipolar depression did not stratify based on inflammatory markers. However, a recent RCT evaluating the effects of omega-3s in MDD, stratified by baseline inflammatory marker levels, demonstrated that antidepressant effects are only observed in the subgroup of participants with elevated inflammatory markers (Rapaport et al. ). While these results have not been replicated in BD samples, it is likely that similar effects would be observed, whereby only the subgroup of inflammatory-BD benefits from adjunctive omega-3s. As such, the variability in results in omega-3 RCTs might be largely related to heterogeneity in immune dysfunction in different BD samples.
Adjunctive omega-3s have been minimally investigated in the acute treatment of mania. In a small 4-week RCT ( n = 15), the effects of adjunctive omega-3s in acutely manic BD inpatients was evaluated, finding no significant differences in change in Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS) scores compared to placebo (i.e., treatment as usual) (Chiu et al. ). Additionally, in the aforementioned studies in bipolar depression, no significant differences in symptoms of mania were observed compared to placebo (Sarris et al. ). Conversely, in a small, single-armed, open label, 6-week study with 18 children and adolescence diagnosed with BD, clinician ratings of both mania and depression, were significantly lower and global functioning significantly higher after supplementation (Clayton et al. ). However, in the absence of a control group, it is not possible to determine if these effects were primarily related to mood-stabilizing medications being prescribed or if adjunctive omega-3s provided an additional benefit.
Taken together, there is inadequate evidence to support the use of omega-3s in BD. Antidepressant effects were only observed in smaller studies, whereas larger studies, including one large RCT, showed no significant differences between adjunctive omega-3s and placebo. However, heterogeneity in study design and the illness itself (e.g., as a heterogeneous illness, omega-3s might be effective only in the subgroup of inflammatory-BD) may also be contributory to these mixed results. Compared to bipolar depression, even fewer studies have assessed the anti-manic effects of omega-3s, with early results being primarily negative. In all BD studies, omega-3s were found to be well tolerated with no significant adverse events reported and no evidence of treatment emergent manic switches compared to placebo (Sarris et al. ).
N-acetylcysteine
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) increases systemic levels of glutathione, thus exerting anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory effects peripherally and centrally (i.e., in the central nervous system (CNS)). The effects of NAC have been evaluated in numerous psychiatric disorders with preliminary results suggestive of transdiagnostic benefits in phenomenologically diverse disorders, such as psychosis, anxiety, substance use, and mood disorders (both MDD and BD) (Berk et al. , ; Zheng et al. ). In BD, antidepressant effects have been demonstrated in a 24-week RCT ( n = 75) comparing adjunctive NAC 1000 mg oral twice daily compared to adjunctive placebo (Berk et al. ). Adjunctive NAC was associated with significantly reduced depression symptom severity (as measured by the Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS)) throughout the trial and at the primary endpoint (i.e., week 24) compared to placebo, with a large effect size (SMD = 0.75; p < 0.001). NAC was reported to be well-tolerated with no serious adverse events or increase in manic switches compared to the placebo group.
Three notable post hoc analyses were conducted with this 24-week RCT evaluating the effects of NAC specifically in participants meeting criteria for a current major depressive episode (MDE) (Magalhaes et al. ) or for a current hypomanic/manic episode (Magalhaes et al. ) at baseline, as well as a subgroup analysis of participants with BD-II (Magalhaes et al. ). Assessing the subgroup of acutely depressed BD participants, NAC was associated with very large antidepressant effects with 8 of 10 participants in the NAC group having an antidepressant response (i.e., greater than 50% reduction in MADRS) compared to only one of seven participants in the placebo group. Post hoc analysis of participants meeting criteria for mania or hypomania at baseline also had positive results, demonstrating a significant reduction in YMRS scores in the NAC group ( n = 8), whereas the placebo group ( n = 7) had worsening of symptoms by the primary endpoint.
The subgroup analysis of BD-II participants also yielded positive results; six of seven participants achieved full remission of both depressive and manic symptoms in the NAC group as compared to only two of seven participants in the placebo group ( P = 0.031). Given the limited number of studies assessing interventions for BD-II, these results may be of particular importance for future study. However, interpretation of results is limited by the small sample size and post-hoc nature of the analysis.
The effect of NAC in maintenance treatment has also been evaluated in a 24-week RCT ( n = 149) that followed an 8-week open label trial of NAC (Berk et al. , ). During the open-label trial, significant reduction in depressive symptoms were observed (Berk et al. ). During the subsequent maintenance RCT phase, there was minimal further change in depression severity with scores remaining low in both groups with no statistically significant difference in recurrence rates, clinical functioning, or quality of life measures with NAC versus placebo (Berk et al. ). Therefore, the benefit of NAC as a maintenance treatment failed to be demonstrated; however, the low baseline MADRS scores and relative stability when entering the maintenance phase may have prevented an effect from being observed.
In summary, both open-label and RCT-level data have demonstrated antidepressant effects with adjunctive NAC in the treatment of BD. Preliminary results suggest that NAC may also reduce symptoms of mania. Post hoc analyses have also demonstrated efficacy in both BD-I and BD-II. The effect of NAC as a maintenance treatment has yet to be established, as NAC failed to demonstrate clinical benefits in a maintenance RCT. Also, of note, Soares et al. recently completed a phase II RCT of aspirin (ASA) and NAC as adjunctive treatments for BD (NCT01797575); however, the results of this trial have yet to be published. Additional studies assessing the effects of NAC are currently ongoing (Ellegaard et al. ). The potential pro-cognitive effects of NAC in BD are also of interest for future studies (Skvarc et al. ).
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
NSAIDs exert their anti-inflammatory effects through inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 and -2, thus preventing the production of pro-inflammatory prostaglandins. Available NSAIDs are either non-selective (i.e., inhibit COX-1 and COX-2; e.g., ibuprofen, ASA) or selective for COX-2 (e.g., celecoxib) (Green ). The effect of adjunctive NSAIDs has been evaluated in prospective and retrospective studies in both MDD and BD with mixed results (Stolk et al. ; Gallagher et al. ; Kohler et al. ; Köhler-Forsberg et al. ; Husain et al. ). Initial retrospective analyses suggested that NSAIDs may decrease the effectiveness of antidepressants in MDD (Gallagher et al. ); however, in BD, the Clinical and Health Outcomes Initiatives in Comparative Effectiveness for Bipolar Disorder (CHOICE-BD) Study demonstrated that NSAIDs and paracetamol do not affect 6-month mood-stabilizing treatment outcome among 482 BD patients. These results suggest that NSAIDs do not have negative effects on clinical outcomes in BD; however, the potential clinical benefits of adjunctive NSAIDs must be tested via prospective RCTs, as summarized herein.
The antidepressant effects of celecoxib, a selective COX-2 inhibitor, was evaluated in a 6-week RCT ( n = 28) comparing adjunctive celecoxib 400 mg oral daily versus adjunctive placebo in participants with a confirmed diagnosis of BD-I or BD-II meeting criteria for an MDE or mixed episode at baseline (Nery et al. ). In the first week of treatment, the celecoxib group had a significant reduction in Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS) scores compared to placebo; however, at the end of the 6-week trial, the primary outcome was negative with no statistically significant difference in change in HDRS scores between celecoxib and placebo groups. Notably, a larger RCT is currently ongoing to examine the possible antidepressant effects of celecoxib in BD (NCT01479829).
The use of ASA in BD, and other psychiatric disorder (Berk et al. ), has also been of interest. Saroukhani et al. ( ) assessed the antidepressant effects of adjunctive ASA 80 mg oral three times daily in married male BD participants ( n = 32) and found no significant differences in any clinical outcomes between ASA and placebo groups by the end of the 6-week RCT. No serious adverse events or increases in treatment emergent manic episodes were observed. Savitz et al. ( ) also assessed the effects of ASA in combination with minocycline to augment the treatment of bipolar depression in an RCT, described further in the minocycline section. In brief, augmenting conventional therapy with ASA + minocycline had antidepressant effects; however, adjunctive ASA alone (i.e., without minocycline) had no significant benefit above treatment as usual.
The use of adjunctive NSAIDS (specifically celecoxib) in the acute treatment of mania has been assessed in three RCTs. In the first proof-of-concept RCT, inpatients with the diagnosis of acute bipolar mania without psychotic features ( n = 46) underwent 6 weeks of treatment with either celecoxib (400 mg daily) or placebo as an adjunctive treatment to sodium valproate (Arabzadeh et al. ). A significantly higher remission rate was observed in the celecoxib group (87.0%) compared to the placebo group (43.5%) at week 6 ( P = 0.005). General linear model repeated measures demonstrated a significant effect for the time × treatment interaction on the YMRS scores ( F (2.27, 99.98) = 6.67, P = 0.001]. These results were also replicated in adolescent inpatients ( n = 40) with acute mania in an 8-week RCT comparing celecoxib (100 mg twice daily) with placebo as an adjunctive treatment to lithium and risperidone (Mousavi et al. ). Significantly greater improvement was observed in YMRS scores in the celecoxib group compared with the placebo group from baseline to the primary endpoint (i.e., week 8; P = 0.04). Increased response rates trended to favor the celecoxib group, however, failed to reach statistical significance ( P = 0.08).
Another RCT evaluated the effects of adjunctive celecoxib (200 mg twice daily) or placebo in participants with mania ( n = 35) undergoing an acute course of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), evaluating changes in YMRS and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels (Kargar et al. ). Over the course of six ECT sessions, no significant differences in changes in YMRS scores were noted between celecoxib and placebo groups, as both groups significantly improved with ECT. Additionally, adding celecoxib was not associated with a significant rise in BDNF levels following ECT.
In summary, adjunctive NSAIDs have not demonstrated antidepressant effects in BD, with negative RCTs for celecoxib (Nery et al. ) and ASA (Saroukhani et al. ); however, these negative RCTs may have been underpowered. Additionally, while the primary endpoint yielded a negative result, celecoxib was associated with earlier onset of antidepressant effects, in the first week of treatment (Nery et al. ). Proof-of-concept RCTs have demonstrated likely anti-manic effects with celecoxib adjunctive to conventional pharmacotherapy in both adult (Arabzadeh et al. ) and adolescent (Mousavi et al. ) samples. However, celecoxib adjunctive to ECT failed to yield additional anti-manic benefits compared to ECT alone (Kargar et al. ). Results from the CHOICE-BD study suggest that use of NSAIDs during maintenance treatment likely has a neutral effect in BD, with no evidence for worsening or improving clinical outcomes (Köhler-Forsberg et al. ).
The differential role of non-selective COX inhibition (e.g., ASA) versus selective COX-2 inhibitors (e.g., celecoxib) must also be evaluated prospectively as the relative risks and benefits of these two categories of NSAIDS continues to be controversial (Green ; Stolk et al. ; Muller ). For example, while most clinical trials in BD have evaluated selective COX-2 inhibitors, a pharmaco-epidemiological study suggested that only ASA was beneficial (as determined by medication changes), while COX-2 had no observable benefits when co-prescribed with lithium in BD (Stolk et al. ).
Minocycline
Minocycline is a tetracyclic antibiotic with anti-inflammatory properties, with numerous other potential neuroprotective downstream effects, such as decreasing oxidative stress, aberrant apoptosis, and glutamate excitotoxicity (Soczynska et al. ). Minocycline exerts anti-inflammatory effects by attenuating the action of TNF-α, downregulating proinflammatory cytokine production by decreasing the ability of T cells to interact with and activate microglia. Three proof-of-concept RCTs (pooled n = 158) have demonstrated antidepressant effects of minocycline in MDD, with moderate to large effects sizes, as demonstrated by a recent meta-analysis (SMD = − 0.78 (95% confidence interval − 0.4 to − 1.33); P = 0.005) (Rosenblat and McIntyre ). Compared to MDD, the effects of minocycline in BD has been relatively less studied. In a pilot, open-label, 8-week study evaluating adjunctive minocycline for the treatment of bipolar I/II depression ( n = 27), adjunctive minocycline was associated with a reduction in depressive symptom severity from baseline to week 8, with large effect sizes, based on decreases on the MADRS ( P < 0.001, d = 0.835), HDRS ( P < 0.001, d = 0.949) and the clinical global impression-severity (CGI-S) scale ( P < 0.001, d = 1.09) (Soczynska et al. ). Potential pro-cognitive effects were also assessed, demonstrating improvements in psychomotor speed. Further, Soczynska et al. assessed inflammatory markers at baseline and over the course of treatment, observing a reduction of IL-12 over the course of treatment, providing preliminary evidence that minocycline may be exerting its antidepressant effects by targeting inflammatory cytokines.
The antidepressant effects of adjunctive minocycline and/or adjunctive ASA in BD was also evaluated in an adaptive, four-armed, 2 × 2 phase IIA, 6-week RCT with acutely depressed BD outpatients ( n = 99) (Savitz et al. , ). The following four groups were used to augment the treatment of bipolar depression: active minocycline (100 mg twice daily) + active aspirin (81 mg twice daily) (M + A); active minocycline + placebo aspirin (M + P); placebo-minocycline + active aspirin (A + P); and placebo-minocycline + placebo aspirin (P + P). In a two-group analysis, the combination minocycline + ASA group showed a greater response rate than the placebo group (P + P) ( P = 0.034, odds ratio (OR) = 2.93, number needed to treat (NNT) = 4.7). When all four arms were included in the analysis, there was a main effect of ASA on treatment response that was driven by both the combination minocycline + ASA group and the ASA group ( p = 0.019, OR = 3.67, NNT = 4.0). Additionally, there was a significant three-way interaction between ASA, minocycline, and IL-6, indicating that response to minocycline was significantly greater in participants in the minocycline group with higher IL-6 concentrations. Moreover, participants in the minocycline group who responded to treatment had significantly greater decreases in IL-6 levels versus non-responders. While these important subgroup analyses showed positive results, there was no significant main effect of ASA or minocycline on the mean change in MADRS scores across visits.
In summary, two recent proof-of-concepts clinical trials, along with earlier case report level data (not discussed here, see (Levine et al. )), have demonstrated promising results, suggestive of likely antidepressant effects of minocycline in BD, with similar effect sizes as seen in MDD (Rosenblat and McIntyre ). As indicated by both clinical trials, the benefits of minocycline in BD are likely to be greater in patients with elevated pro-inflammatory markers (Soczynska et al. ; Savitz et al. ). As such, additional rigorous RCTs assessing minocycline in BD, integrating inflammatory marker analysis, are merited. Notably, Iosifescu et al. are currently conducting an 8-week, open label, phase 4 clinical trial of minocycline for bipolar depression measuring change in depressive symptoms and utilizing proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS) to measure N-acetylaspartate (NAA) levels in the brain during treatment (NCT01514422). While there is great promise for minocycline in bipolar depression, the anti-manic effects and mood stabilizing effects in maintenance treatment have yet to be evaluated.
Pioglitazone
Pioglitazone is a PPAR-gamma agonist with potent anti-inflammatory (mediated by suppression of nuclear factor-κB signaling pathway) and anti-hyperglycemic effects. Pioglitazone has preliminary evidence for antidepressant properties in both MDD and BD (Kemp et al. , , ; Sepanjnia et al. ; Kashani et al. ; Zeinoddini et al. ). In a 6-week RCT, the antidepressant effects of pioglitazone 30-mg oral daily compared to placebo (with both groups receiving lithium) was assessed in acutely depressed BD-I outpatients ( n = 48) (Zeinoddini et al. ). A significantly greater reduction in HDRS scores was observed in the pioglitazone group compared to the placebo group at weeks 2, 4, and 6 with a moderate effect size at the primary endpoint (SMD = 0.54; P = 0.08). An 8-week single-armed, open-label study found similar antidepressant effects in BD participants with comorbid metabolic dysfunction ( n = 34), observing a significantly greater decrease in the total Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (IDS-C30) score from 38.7 ± 8.2 at baseline to 21.2 ± 9.2 at week 8 ( P < 0.001) with adjunctive pioglitazone (Kemp et al. ). Notably, elevated baseline IL-6 levels were associated with greater decreases in depression severity, suggesting that antidepressant effects are mediated by anti-inflammatory effects and that the inflammatory-BD subgroup may benefit more from pioglitazone.
In summary, two proof-of-concept studies (one RCT, one open label) have demonstrated significant antidepressant effects in the acute treatment of bipolar depression (Kemp et al. ; Zeinoddini et al. ). Early results also suggest that pioglitazone exerts its antidepressant effects through an anti-inflammatory mechanism. In both studies, pioglitazone was associated with good tolerability with no evidence for treatment emergent mania. As such, additional larger RCTs are merited, which should also evaluate inflammatory markers at baseline and over the course of treatment. While the antidepressant effects of pioglitazone are promising, the effects of pioglitazone in the acute treatment of mania or in maintenance treatment have yet to be investigated.
Coenzyme Q10
Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), a mitochondrial modulator with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, has been hypothesized to potentially have antidepressant, pro-cognitive, and neuroprotective effects (Aboul-Fotouh ; Morris et al. ). The antidepressant effects of adjunctive CoQ10 was initially investigated in a 4-week, open-label trial in an older (age over 55) bipolar depression sample ( n = 18), demonstrating significant reductions in MADRS scores ( P = 0.001), with greatest effects on symptoms of lassitude, inability to feel, apparent sadness, and concentration difficulties (Forester et al. , ). More recently, an 8-week RCT evaluating the antidepressant effects of adjunctive CoQ10 200-mg oral daily compared to placebo in an acutely depressed adult BD sample demonstrated greater improvements in MADRS scores with a large effect size (SMD = 0.87; P < 0.001; n = 69) (Mehrpooya et al. ). A significantly increased antidepressant response rate (i.e., proportion with greater than 50% reduction in MADRS) in the CoQ10 group (26 of 36 participants) compared to placebo (only 4 of 33 participants) was also demonstrated at the week-8 primary endpoint ( P = 0.001).
In summary, one open-label study (Forester et al. , ) and one RCT (Mehrpooya et al. ) demonstrated positive effects of CoQ10 in the acute treatment of bipolar depression. Adjunctive CoQ10 was associated with good tolerability with no evidence for treatment emergent manic episodes in both studies. Larger RCTs, measuring inflammatory and bioenergetic markers are therefore merited to further determine the antidepressant efficacy of CoQ10, along with its mechanism of action. No studies evaluating the effects of CoQ10 in mania or maintenance treatment were identified.
Others promising anti-inflammatory agents of interest
In addition to the aforementioned anti-inflammatory agents (summarized in Table 1 ), numerous other agents have been hypothesized to have potential benefits in the treatment of BD. For example, there has been great interest in monoclonal antibodies (i.e., biologics, approved for treatment of autoimmune disorders) that specifically and potently target individual inflammatory cytokines. In a landmark 12-week RCT assessing the effects of infliximab (TNF-alpha inhibitor) in treatment resistant depression, including both MDD ( n = 51) and BD ( n = 9) participants, statistically and clinically significant antidepressant effects were observed in the subgroup with elevated baseline levels of CRP and TNF-alpha (Raison et al. ). Notably, however, the overall antidepressant effect (including the full sample) was equivocal comparing infliximab and placebo groups. This trial was also the first study to highlight the importance of stratifying samples based on inflammatory status. Additionally, a 12-week RCT evaluating adjunctive infliximab for the treatment of bipolar I/II depression, stratified by inflammatory status, was recently completed by McIntyre et al.; however, the results have yet to be published (NCT02363738). Table 1 Summary of effects of adjunctive anti-inflammatory agents compared to adjunctive placebo in the treatment of BD during specific illness phases. Highest level of evidence for effect is shown in parentheses. Note: Only highest level of evidence is displayed with meta-analysis > randomized controlled trials (RCTs) > prospective open label studies > naturalistic effectiveness studies > post hoc analysis (e.g., if an open label study and RCT has been completed, both with positive results, only “(RCT)” will appear). “Unknown” denotes no identified studies of relevance. Please refer to main text for specific references and further details of clinical studies (e.g., sample sizes, effect sizes, etc.) Agent BD depression Mania/hypomania BD maintenance Omega-3s Mixed results (meta-analysis) No benefit (RCT) Unknown N-acetylcysteine Positive effect (RCT) Positive effect (post hoc analysis) No benefit (RCT) NSAIDS No benefit (RCT) Positive effect (RCT) No benefit (effectiveness study) Minocycline Positive effect in subgroup (RCT) Unknown Unknown Pioglitazone Positive effect (RCT) Unknown Unknown Coenzyme Q10 Positive effect (RCT) Unknown Unknown Class effect Positive effect (meta-analysis) Positive effect (meta-analysis) Unknown
Use of nutraceuticals, in addition to omega-3s as previously described, with anti-inflammatory properties have also been of interest (Sarris et al. ). For example, curcumin has demonstrated promising results in the treatment of MDD (Al-Karawi et al. ), however, has yet to be studied in BD (Brietzke et al. ). Probiotics, targeting inflammatory processes effecting the microbiota-gut-brain axis have also been of interest, with no RCTs completed yet to support or refute their use in BD (Rios et al. ).
More recently, combining lithium with low-dose colchicine has been suggested to facilitate the responsiveness of BD to lithium by reducing leukocyte tissue emigration, the release of neutrophil elastase and the release of leukocyte pro-inflammatory cytokines; however, this hypothesis has yet to be tested in interventional studies (Mooney and Brady ). In addition to pharmacological treatments targeting the immune system, non-pharmacological interventions have also been proposed. For example, the use of the ketogenic diet in mood disorders has been proposed to potentially have antidepressant properties via the downstream anti-inflammatory effects of the ketogenic diet (Bauer et al. ; Brietzke et al. ).
Discussion
In summary, immune dysfunction has been strongly implicated in the pathophysiology of BD. As such, numerous proof-of-concept clinical trials have assessed the effects of anti-inflammatory agents in the treatment of BD. The majority of these studies have assessed the effects of adjunctive anti-inflammatories in the acute treatment of bipolar depression. Meta-analyses have suggested that mechanistically diverse anti-inflammatory agents may have a “class effect” in BD, having antidepressant effects with a moderate to large effect size (Rosenblat et al. ; Husain et al. ). However, antidepressant efficacy and the strength of available evidence is highly variable when evaluating specific anti-inflammatory agents individually. Evidence also varies based on illness phase, as summarized in Table 1 . Significantly fewer studies have evaluated the anti-manic effects of anti-inflammatory agents; however, preliminary results suggest that adjunctive celecoxib and NAC might have anti-manic effects, improving symptoms of mania compared to conventional pharmacotherapy alone. There is also a paucity of BD-maintenance studies, with completed studies largely revealing no significant clinical benefits of anti-inflammatory agents when used in the maintenance phase, as compared to conventional therapy alone.
With regard to specific anti-inflammatory agents, replicated evidence has demonstrated significant antidepressant effects with adjunctive NAC; however, BD-maintenance studies have failed to demonstrate superiority of NAC compared to placebo (Berk et al. , ). Proof-of-concept clinical trials have also demonstrated significant antidepressant effects with minocycline (Soczynska et al. ; Savitz et al. ), CoQ10 (Mehrpooya et al. ), and pioglitazone (Zeinoddini et al. ) with moderate to large effect sizes. Numerous RCTs evaluated the antidepressant effects of omega-3s; however, results were mixed with only smaller RCTs reporting significant antidepressant effects in BD and negative evidence for anti-manic effects (Sarris et al. ). Two RCTs failed to demonstrate antidepressant effects with adjunctive NSAIDs (celecoxib and ASA), however, both studies may have been underpowered (Nery et al. ; Saroukhani et al. ). Preliminary results have suggested that adjunctive celecoxib may have anti-manic effects when added to conventional pharmacotherapy (Arabzadeh et al. ) while having no added benefit when used adjunctively with ECT (Kargar et al. ). In addition to these agents, numerous other interventions, such as infliximab, probiotics, curcumin, colchicine, and the ketogenic diet, have been hypothesized to be potentially beneficial; however, these agents are currently lacking completed interventional studies to support or refute their use in BD.
While the reviewed studies are very promising, suggesting that anti-inflammatory agents may be beneficial in the treatment of BD, no specific medication has yet met the threshold of evidence to be clinically recommended or indicated (i.e., a minimum of two positive phase III RCTs are required for approval of a medication for a specific indication). As such, additional larger, rigorously designed RCTs are required before these promising finding may be translated into clinical practice. Additionally, numerous studies have shown that anti-inflammatory agents are most beneficial for the subgroup of BD with immune dysfunction (e.g., elevated baseline inflammatory markers) (Raison et al. ; Kemp et al. ; Savitz et al. ). As such, future RCTs should also stratify based on immune profile, along with measuring changes in inflammatory cytokines throughout the course of treatment to better understand the mechanism of action of these diverse agents.
Notably, most reviewed agents have numerous targets outside of the immune system, which may also contribute to the antidepressant and mood stabilizing effects of these agents. For example, minocycline has numerous other potential neuroprotective downstream effects, such as decreasing oxidative stress, aberrant apoptosis, and glutamate excitotoxicity (Soczynska et al. ). Therefore, at the current time, it is unclear the relative contribution of anti-inflammatory effects versus effects on other systems that may account for mood stabilizing effects.
In addition to assessing the effect of anti-inflammatory agents on core mood symptoms of BD, evaluating potential pro-cognitive effects should also be considered, as mounting evidence suggests that immune dysfunction has a significant role in the pathophysiology of cognitive dysfunction and neuroprogression (Barbosa et al. ). As cognitive dysfunction is a strong predictor of functional impairments, and current treatments are often ineffective at improving cognitive function in BD, targeting the immune system to prevent or reverse cognitive dysfunction is of great interest (Rosenblat et al. ). Further, if immune dysfunction is contributing to the neuroprogression of BD, targeting the immune system could potentially have disease-modifying effects, altering the overall trajectory of illness (Berk et al. ).
While the focus of the current review was exploring novel anti-inflammatory interventions for BD, understanding the immune modulating effects of currently available treatments is also of great importance. Indeed, the immune modulating effects of conventional treatments for BD (e.g., lithium, anti-convulsant, anti-psychotics) remains unclear with studies showing contradictory results (Maes et al. ; Kenis and Maes ; Nassar and Azab ; Maddu and Raghavendra ; van den Ameele et al. ). Understanding these effects may also allow for improved personalization of treatment selection, based on immune profile. For example, in a recent study, CRP was used to reliably predict treatment response to lurasidone (a second-generation antipsychotic indicated for bipolar depression) (Raison et al. ). In this 6-week RCT, acutely depressed BD-I participants were randomized to receive monotherapy with lurasidone 20–60 mg/day ( n = 161), lurasidone 80–120 mg/day ( n = 162), or placebo ( n = 162). Increasing pre-treatment CRP levels predicted a larger overall antidepressant response to lurasidone, based on changes in MADRS scores compared to placebo; with baseline CRP < 2 mg/L, antidepressant effects of lurasidone were equivalent to placebo, while participants with CRP = 2–5 mg/L had a moderate antidepressant effect size ( d = 0.55; P < 0.001) and participants with CRP > 5 mg/L had a large antidepressant effect size ( d = 0.82; P < 0.001).
In conclusion, targeting the immune system in the treatment of BD shows great promise. Currently, available evidence primarily supports antidepressant effects of anti-inflammatory agents, while the effects of these agents during manic and euthymic periods remains relatively uncertain. While no specific treatment has sufficient evidence to recommend clinical use currently, numerous studies are ongoing, which may yield sufficient evidence to allow for translation into clinical practice in the near future. Future studies should be rigorously designed RCTs that evaluate the effects of anti-inflammatory agents in BD, with adequate measures of core mood symptoms, cognitive function, and inflammatory markers. Additionally, as immune dysfunction is a transdiagnostic phenomenon, anti-inflammatory BD studies may provide novel targets for other psychiatric disorders (e.g., MDD, schizophrenia), as well as vice versa.