Introduction
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition characterized by deficits in social communication and interaction as well as restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities (DSM-5 Task Force ). According to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), ASD affects approximately 1 in 59 children in the USA (Baio et al. ). ASD is clinically and etiologically heterogeneous, encompassing a wide range of cognitive and verbal abilities, as well as behavioral symptoms. While longitudinal research on the medical co-morbidities associated with ASD remains limited, individuals with ASD suffer high rates of concomitant medical illness and are at risk of premature death, with respiratory, cardiac, and epileptic events being the most common causes of death (Kohane et al. ; Bilder et al. ). The clinical and biological heterogeneity of ASD has led to significant challenges in developing effective targeted drug treatments for the core and associated symptoms, suggesting a need to define and utilize clinical subtypes of ASD to guide both research and treatment.
Evidence for inflammation and immune dysfunction as a possible pathogenic mediator of a number of neuropsychiatric disorders including depression, schizophrenia, and pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with streptococcal infections (PANDAS) is accumulating (Williams and Swedo ; Howes and McCutcheon ; Jeon and Kim ). Similarly, there has been longstanding and considerable interest in defining an immune subtype of ASD (Careaga et al. ; Depino ; McDougle et al. ; Meltzer and Van de Water ). Variation in the timing and mechanism of inflammatory insults during specific developmental time points may account for the diversity of neuropsychiatric phenotypes associated with inflammation. In this article, we introduce evidence supporting a hypothesis of an immune subtype of ASD which is characterized by systemic, multi-organ inflammation or immune dysregulation with shared mechanisms that drive both the behavioral and physical illnesses associated with ASD. To this end, we describe multiple areas of research examining autoimmune mechanisms and immune dysregulation in ASD. We then discuss how inflammation in major body systems has been linked to ASD and how conventional and emerging treatments for ASD interface with the immune system. We conclude with a discussion on how framing a subtype of ASD as a lifelong, multi-system inflammatory or immune-mediated syndrome may guide future research and change clinical care.
Evidence for abnormal immune function in autism spectrum disorder
While the relationship between immunologic dysfunction and ASD has yet to be clearly elucidated, multiple areas of inquiry suggest abnormal immune functioning in at least a subset of individuals. In this section, we review how several areas of research, including family history studies of autoimmunity, immunogenetics, maternal immune activation, neuroinflammation, and systemic inflammation, converge to suggest immune dysfunction in ASD.
Family history of autoimmune disorders
A link between familial autoimmunity and ASD was first proposed by Money et al. after observing an unusually extensive family history of autoimmune disorders in a child with ASD. The child’s father was diagnosed with chronic athlete’s foot infection, his mother ulcerative colitis, one older brother with hypoparathyroidism, Addison’s disease, and diabetes mellitus, and another brother with hypothyroidism, Addison’s disease, and alopecia totalis (Money et al. ). Two of the brothers also had a history of candidiasis. Based upon this extensive family history of autoimmunity, the authors postulated an etiologic relationship between autism and autoimmunity.
Since then, a number of family studies and registry-based studies have examined this hypothesis. Family studies compare the rates of autoimmune diseases in family members of probands with ASD to those of healthy controls. Some family studies have reported higher rates of autoimmune diseases in families of children with ASD (Comi et al. ; Sweeten et al. ), while others have not (Micali et al. ). Results from registry-based studies have also suggested a relationship between familial autoimmunity and risk for ASD. One of the largest registry-based studies evaluating a cohort of 689,196 children, including 3325 with ASD, found that family histories of celiac disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and type 1 diabetes were associated with increased risk for ASD (Atladottir et al. ). A recent meta-analysis which included 11 studies demonstrated that a positive family history of autoimmune disease was associated with 28% (95% CI 12–48%) higher odds of ASD. A family history of hypothyroidism (OR = 1.64, 95% CI 1.07–2.50), type 1 diabetes (OR = 1.49, 95% CI 1.23–1.81), rheumatoid arthritis (OR = 1.51, 95% CI 1.19–1.91), and psoriasis (OR = 1.59, 95% CI 1.28–1.97) was associated with increased risk for ASD in children (Wu et al. ).
Notably, there are a number of limitations associated with both family and registry-based studies (McDougle et al. ). Family studies are often limited by ascertainment bias, particularly when the parents of the proband are asked to report on the medical history of other family members. Registry-based studies benefit from larger sample sizes as well as autoimmune disorder diagnoses supported by medical records but are limited in that less severe cases of autoimmune disorders may be missed. Both study designs can suffer from lacking a gold standard methodology for diagnosing ASD. Finally, family and registry-based studies may underestimate rates of familial autoimmunity, since susceptibility to autoimmune disorders increases with age (Beeson ). Most existing studies have assessed the family members of young probands who continue to be at risk for developing an autoimmune disorder later in life.
Immunogenetics
Several dozen ASD candidate genes have been identified, collectively accounting for about 10–20% of all ASD cases (Geschwind ). Notably, several ASD candidate genes are involved in immune signaling. A review of seven genome-wide expression studies in ASD demonstrated that six of the seven studies supported upregulation of immune genes in the pathogenesis of ASD (Lintas et al. ).
Much of immunogenetics research in ASD has focused on the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) gene complex. The HLA system is a polymorphic gene complex which encodes the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins. MHC proteins are cell surface proteins which play multiple roles in regulating the immune system. Early work demonstrated that parents of children with ASD were more likely to share HLA types than parents of children without ASD (Stubbs et al. ). In particular, the HLA class II DRB1 gene has been implicated in ASD. Multiple studies have demonstrated that certain alleles of DRB1 confer higher risk of autism, a finding which has been confirmed in ethnically diverse populations (Warren et al. ; Chien et al. ; Mostafa et al. ).
The MET oncogene is another gene which has been associated with ASD that has immune implications. MET encodes the MET receptor tyrosine kinase which regulates neuronal migration during fetal neurodevelopment (Powell et al. , ) and also functions as a negative immune regulator (Beilmann et al. ; Okunishi et al. ). A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) affecting the MET promoter has been associated with ASD (Campbell et al. ). CC and CG alleles represent a 1.6–1.8 increased relative risk of ASD, compared with the GG allele (Campbell et al. ). Furthermore, these genetic variants of the MET promoter are associated with the core social and communication impairments of autism (Campbell et al. ).
Maternal immune activation
There are several lines of inquiry that support the hypothesis that prenatal immune activation contributes to the development of ASD. Early studies demonstrated that congenital rubella is associated with increased risk of ASD in children (Chess , ; Chess et al. ). It was later observed that gestational exposure to a number of other viruses including cytomegalovirus (Slawinski et al. ), measles (Deykin and MacMahon ), and influenza (Atladóttir et al. ) also increase the risk of ASD. A registry-based study through Kaiser Permanente demonstrated that while overall infections during pregnancy were not associated with ASD (OR = 1.15, 95% CI 0.92–1.43), infections requiring hospital admission (OR = 1.48, 95% CI 1.07–2.04), and particularly bacterial infections (OR = 1.36, 95% CI 1.05–1.78), were associated with ASD (Zerbo et al. ). It has been further demonstrated that ASD is associated with maternal fever during pregnancy (Zerbo et al. ). The observation that infection by a range of pathogens during pregnancy can increase the risk of ASD suggests that the maternal inflammatory response to infection, rather than any specific pathogen alone, may be etiologically responsible for this association (Meltzer and Van de Water ).
Multiple animal models of maternal immune activation (MIA) have been developed to test the hypothesis that gestational inflammation affects neurodevelopment and behavior in offspring. In these models, pregnant rodents are challenged either through direct infection with an infectious agent or with an antigen mimic. The offspring are then observed for immunological, neurodevelopmental, and behavioral changes. Shi et al. ( ) demonstrated that exposing pregnant mice to the human influenza virus resulted in offspring with aberrant social interactions which responded to antipsychotic medications. Polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)) is a synthetic double-stranded RNA viral mimic that induces an immune response resembling the response induced by acute viral infections (Traynor et al. ). The offspring of pregnant mice exposed to poly(I:C) compared with those injected with saline demonstrate behaviors that are analogous to the core symptoms of ASD, including deficits in social interaction and communication as well as repetitive or stereotypic behaviors. Social interaction was assessed by measuring time spent with a social target, which was found to be decreased among the poly(I:C)-exposed offspring relative to the saline controls. Communication impairment was assessed by measuring ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs) which are emitted by pups to trigger maternal behaviors and by adults as mating calls. Poly(I:C)-exposed pups display decreased USVs which persisted into adulthood. Finally, the exposed offspring displayed increased repetitive behaviors such as time spent burying marbles and grooming (Malkova et al. ). Similar outcomes have also now been demonstrated in rat (Zuckerman and Weiner ) and monkey models (Bauman et al. ). While these animal models provide compelling evidence that MIA is associated with behavioral changes in offspring that are homologous to ASD symptoms in humans, the mechanism by which maternal inflammation influences fetal neurodevelopment remains unknown. The placenta itself may also synthesize inflammatory proteins in response to markers of inflammation from maternal serum. Alternatively, the developing fetal immune system may become upregulated in response to MIA (Depino ). Future work will need to assess whether one or a combination of these mechanisms underpins the connection between MIA and the behavioral changes observed in affected offspring.
The presence of maternal antibodies directed against the fetal brain (auto-antibodies) has been elucidated as one possible mechanism for how maternal immune dysregulation may mediate development of the ASD phenotype. A western blot study comparing serum samples among mothers of children with ASD, mothers of typically developing children, and mothers of children with non-ASD developmental disabilities showed that the serum from mothers of children with ASD uniquely bound to human fetal brain proteins which were 37 and 73 kDa in size, particularly in children with regressive ASD (Braunschweig et al. ). A large subsequent study which included 2431 mothers of children with ASD and 654 controls demonstrated that mothers of children with ASD were four times as likely to have serum anti-brain antibodies (Brimberg et al. ). A follow-up study demonstrated a correlation between maternal fetal brain antibodies that were reactive to 39 and 73 kDa proteins and ASD diagnosis, lower expressive language capability, and increased irritability (Braunschweig et al. ). The fetal brain proteins that react to maternal antibodies have been identified as lactate dehydrogenase A and B (LDH-A and LDH-B), stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 (STIP1), collapsin response mediator proteins 1 and 2 (CRMP1 and CRMP2), cypin, and Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1) (Braunschweig et al. ). Further investigation of the role that these proteins play in neurodevelopment may be helpful in elucidating the pathophysiology of ASD.
Animal models have supported the role of maternal auto-antibodies in contributing to the pathogenesis of ASD. One study demonstrated that the sera of ASD mothers were more reactive to prenatal but not postnatal or adult rat brain proteins than the sera of mothers of typically developing children (Zimmerman et al. ). Another study demonstrated that injecting serum from a mother of a child with ASD into pregnant mice resulted in offspring mice with altered exploration and coordination (Dalton et al. ). A study replicating these findings in rhesus monkeys showed that the offspring of pregnant monkeys injected with immunoglobulin (Ig)G antibodies from human mothers of children with ASD had increased stereotypies and hyperactivity, compared with the offspring of monkeys injected with IgG from mothers of typically developing children (Martin et al. ). Animal neuroanatomical studies demonstrate that prenatal exposure to IgG antibodies from mothers of children with ASD in a mouse model results in altered radial glial cell development, increased adult brain size, and larger adult cortical neurons (Martínez-Cerdeño et al. ). Taken together, these studies show that the presence of specific maternal auto-antibodies that react to fetal brain proteins has been associated with ASD. Furthermore, exposure to these maternal auto-antibodies during gestation results in neuroanatomical changes and phenotypic behaviors that resemble ASD in animal models. Thus, the presence of maternal auto-antibodies likely influences, if not defines, a subset of ASD (Meltzer and Van de Water ).
Neuroinflammation
The presence of inflammation within the central nervous system (CNS) in ASD has become increasingly well documented. A study of frozen brain tissue from the frontal cortex of 8 ASD patients and 8 control subjects demonstrated increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6, and GM-CSF), a Th1 cytokine (IFN-γ), and a chemokine (IL-8) in the ASD group. The Th1/Th2 ratio, as measured by comparing IFN-γ (pro-inflammatory) to IL-10 (anti-inflammatory) levels, was also significantly increased in ASD, further supporting a pro-inflammatory state (Li et al. ). Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from 11 patients with ASD demonstrated a unique pro-inflammatory profile of cytokines, including elevated levels of the macrophage chemoattractant protein (MCP-1) (Vargas et al. ). In contrast, a separate study of 12 children with moderate to severe autism demonstrated decreased CSF levels of two metabolites, quinolinic acid and neopterin, which are sensitive markers of inflammation. Concomitantly, low levels of quinolinic acid and neopterin are paradoxical, suggesting dysmaturation of metabolic pathways (Zimmerman et al. ).
Microglia are resident mononuclear phagocytic immune cells of the CNS. They provide immune surveillance of the CNS and become macrophage-like to mediate inflammation in the presence of neuronal injury, and participate in synaptic pruning during normal neurodevelopment (Hughes ; Aguzzi et al. ). Immunohistochemistry studies on slices of the postmortem brain demonstrate increased microglial density and activation in the fronto-insular cortex, visual cortex, and cerebellum (Vargas et al. ; Morgan et al. ; Tetreault et al. ) but no change in microglial activation in the middle frontal gyrus and anterior cingulate gyrus (Vargas et al. ). A study assessing microglia cell markers by qRT-PCR of prefrontal cortex and cerebellar brain tissue similarly demonstrated upregulation of glial cell gene expression in postmortem brain tissue of subjects with a history of autism (Edmonson et al. ). Whole brain immunohistochemistry studies have not yet been reported in ASD. It would be of interest to further characterize which brain regions are associated with inflammation in ASD.
Systemic immune dysregulation
Systemic immune dysregulation may be another driver of the pathophysiology of ASD. Increased permeability of the blood-brain barrier likely mediates the effects of systemic immune regulation on brain function and behavior. A postmortem brain study comparing brains from individuals with ASD, schizophrenia, and healthy controls showed that altered expression of genes associated with the blood-brain barrier integrity was unique to the ASD sample (Fiorentino et al. ).
Cytokines are small cell–signaling proteins which are produced by both the innate and adaptive immune systems and modulate the immune response through either upregulation or downregulation of inflammation. Multiple studies have demonstrated an association between aberrant cytokine profiles and ASD. An in vivo study comparing cultured monocytes isolated from children with ASD with those from age-matched controls showed a different cytokine response to stimulation by toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands. The ASD monocytes demonstrated a markedly increased pro-inflammatory cytokine response when stimulated with TLR 2 and TLR 4 ligands but a decreased inflammatory response when stimulated with a TLR 9 ligand (Enstrom et al. ). A large prospective age-matched study comparing plasma cytokine levels among 2- to 5-year-old children with ASD, typically developing children, and children with non-ASD developmental delay demonstrated that the ASD group had increased levels of several cytokines including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-12p40. Furthermore, increased cytokine levels were predominantly associated with the regressive form of ASD. Finally, higher cytokine levels were associated with communication deficits and aberrant behavior (Ashwood et al. ). Another study comparing plasma cytokine levels among slightly older children (4- to 7-year-olds) demonstrated higher levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-17A in the ASD group. TNF-α concentrations were positively correlated with the severity of ASD symptoms (Xie et al. ).
Atypical natural killer (NK) cell activity has also been noted in ASD. NK cells are early responders of the innate immune system and help regulate the initial immune response during an inflammatory event. An initial study demonstrated a normal number of NK cells in individuals with ASD but decreased ability of NK cells to kill K562 target cells (Warren et al. ). A follow-up study further characterizing NK cell activity in ASD showed increased activity of NK cells under resting conditions, as measured by upregulation of three cytolytic proteins: perforin, granzyme B, and INF-γ. When NK cells were stimulated by the presence of K562 target cells, however, the NK cells from individuals with ASD produced decreased levels of cytolytic proteins compared with those from typically developing controls (Enstrom et al. ). These results suggest that NK cells from individuals with ASD have higher activity at rest but lower activity and decreased ability to lyse targets when stimulated.
Abnormal serum antibody profiles have been demonstrated in individuals with ASD. A study examining the plasma antibody profile among children with ASD demonstrated that children with ASD have lower levels of plasma IgG and IgM compared with typically developing and developmentally delayed controls without ASD. Additionally, the levels of IgG and IgM negatively correlated with behavioral severity (Heuer et al. ). Multiple studies have utilized ELISA and Western immunoblotting techniques to identify the presence of serum auto-antibodies to human brain tissue in individuals with ASD (Silva et al. ; Singer et al. ; Cabanlit et al. ). One recent study demonstrated that the presence of a 62 kDa auto-brain antibody in a child with ASD was significantly correlated with the presence of maternal antibodies targeting the fetal brain (Piras et al. ).
Medical co-morbidities by body system
In comparison to the growing literature on the relationship between immune dysregulation in the CNS and periphery of individuals with ASD, less is known about whether this pathophysiology and inflammation affects other non-CNS organ systems in individuals with ASD. Identifying co-morbid medical conditions in individuals with ASD is important, since management of medical conditions can markedly improve the quality of life for individuals with ASD and their caregivers. Medical co-morbidities can significantly affect social, educational, and employment outcomes and are not routinely screened for (Tye et al. ). Future work that delineates which medical illnesses individuals with ASD are at high risk for developing across the lifespan will be helpful in creating comprehensive clinical guidelines for age-appropriate medical assessment and monitoring, similar to those that exist for other developmental disorders such as Down syndrome or Williams syndrome. Although clinical guidelines for certain disorders, such as gastrointestinal (GI) disorders and sleep disorders in ASD exist (Buie et al. ; Malow et al. ), more comprehensive health supervision guidelines for ASD are lacking. Secondly, a more nuanced understanding of organ systems that are involved in the primary or secondary pathophysiology of ASD may be helpful in identifying clinically relevant ASD subtypes that guide and expand future research and lead to the development of more effective and targeted treatment approaches (Bauman ; Tye et al. ). A thorough systematic assessment of potential co-morbid medical disorders and disease states becoming manifest over the lifespan of those with ASD has not yet been conducted. For example, rates of cardiovascular disease, musculoskeletal inflammatory conditions, and common childhood infections have not been reported in ASD populations. To date, most medical co-morbidity studies have utilized cross-sectional population methods. Population-based studies have demonstrated higher rates of medical co-morbidity in the ASD population compared with the general population in nearly every disease state studied. This finding has been replicated in both adult and child populations (Kohane et al. ; Croen et al. ; Vohra et al. ; Rydzewska et al. ). A range of medical illnesses has been reported to be more common among individuals with ASD, including GI disorders, seizures, sleep disorders, allergies, and asthma (Krakowiak et al. ; Bauman ; Hsiao ). There are multiple contributing factors to increased medical co-morbidity, including use of medication with metabolic side effects such as atypical antipsychotics, as well as social, communication, and cognitive impairments which may prevent individuals with ASD from accessing preventative care or timely diagnosis and treatments (Croen et al. ). It is also possible that the systemic inflammation or immune dysregulation described in the previous section represents a shared physiological mechanism contributing to medical co-morbidities in a subset of ASD patients. Here, we present major inflammatory medical co-morbidities that have been associated with ASD by body system. Future research to better elucidate which of these co-morbidities are integral to an immune-mediated subtype of ASD is necessary and has yet to be defined.
Neurologic
Sleep disorders
Sleep disorders have been widely reported in ASD, with prevalence rates ranging between 40 and 80% (Richdale ; Krakowiak et al. ; Johnson et al. ). A parent-completed questionnaire study of 167 children with ASD reported that 86% of children had at least one sleep problem, including bedtime resistance, insomnia, parasomnias, sleep-disordered breathing, morning rise problems, and daytime sleepiness (Liu et al. ). Interestingly, an animal model of sleep deprivation demonstrated that impaired sleep resulted in increased colonic inflammation (Tang et al. ). This data suggests that the co-existence of two or more medical co-morbidities in ASD can exacerbate levels of systemic inflammation. The sleep architecture of ASD has been described through actigraphy and electroencephalogram (EEG) sleep studies. Laboratory sleep data comparing high-functioning adults with ASD to healthy controls indicates that individuals with autism have longer sleep latency, increased frequency of nighttime awakenings, and lower sleep efficiency (Limoges et al. ). Interestingly, results from a recent preclinical study of a two-hit immune activation model in mice indicated that immune dysregulation is associated with persistent sleep alterations. In this experimental model, pregnant mice were exposed to poly(I:C) on embryonic day 12.5. On postnatal day 9, offspring were then exposed to either lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to simulate a bacterial infection or endotoxin-free saline. Exposure to LPS was associated with increased total sleep time and increased slow-wave sleep. This effect was potentiated by poly(I:C) exposure during gestation (Missig et al. ). Pro-inflammatory states have also been demonstrated in sleep disturbance in humans. Increased gene expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF-α, as well as the inflammatory marker, C-reactive protein (CRP), is associated with sleep disturbance in humans (Irwin et al. , ). Thus, assessing for and treating sleep disturbances may positively impact other medical or behavioral outcomes by decreasing systemic inflammation (Tye et al. ). Taken together, these data suggest that sleep disturbance and altered sleep architecture may be part of a biologically meaningful ASD phenotype mediated by immune activation. Future work should attempt to clarify this relationship and determine whether altered sleep architecture can be used to help define a clinical subtype of ASD.
Seizures
Epilepsy occurs in about one-third of individuals with ASD (Spence and Schneider ). The co-occurrence of ASD and seizures may reflect a shared underlying neurobiology. There is not a predominant seizure type that is most frequent in ASD, and virtually all seizure types have been associated with ASD (Bauman ). The clinical diagnosis of a seizure can be challenging, as staring spells and stereotypic motor movements may be misattributed to behavioral symptoms of ASD (Bauman ). Diagnostic confidence can be improved through obtaining routine EEGs in conjunction with video monitoring.
Notably, 30 to 60% of individuals with ASD demonstrate epileptiform abnormalities on EEG in the absence of clinical seizures (Spence and Schneider ). Despite the high chance of abnormal EEG findings, routine EEGs are not the current standard of care for all patients with ASD. This is in part due to uncertainty with regard to whether antiepileptics are beneficial in this situation (Spence and Schneider ). A case series and a small open-label study of valproic acid demonstrated improvements in ASD symptoms after beginning antiepileptics to suppress epileptiform discharges in the absence of clinical seizures (Plioplys ; Hollander et al. ). In an open-label study, 14 ASD patients were treated with valproic acid (average dose 768 mg/day), and clinical improvements were tracked using the Clinical Global Impressions Scales-Improvement (CGI-I). Ten (71%) of these patients demonstrated a sustained response to valproic acid, with noted improvements in social relatedness and repetitive behaviors (Hollander et al. ). To date, larger and controlled studies remain lacking. Interestingly, valproic acid has well-documented anti-inflammatory properties in animal models of inflammation (Raza et al. ; Zhang et al. ; Amirzargar et al. ). Seemingly paradoxically, valproic acid is a known teratogen and is commonly used to induce ASD-like behaviors in animal models of ASD. To account for this paradox, it has been suggested that the modulatory effects valproic acid exerts on cytokine secretion, which are harmful during prenatal brain development, may actually be protective in the postnatal period (Chez and Guido-Estrada ). It would be of interest to confirm the efficacy of valproic acid on core ASD symptoms, describe clinical indicators that predict a response to valproic acid, and understand whether the effect of valproic acid on ASD symptoms is mediated by reducing inflammation.
Both preclinical animal models and human studies have demonstrated an association between inflammation and seizures. The mouse model of two-hit immune activation described above (Missig et al. ) demonstrated that MIA coupled with simulation of bacterial infection early in life is associated with epileptiform activity on EEG. Offspring of dams exposed to poly(I:C) who then were administered LPS had an increase in spike-wave discharges (SWDs), both during sleep and wakefulness. The SWDs persisted into the 12-week follow-up time point. Increased SWDs were very rare in mice that were not exposed to the second immune challenge. Inflammatory mechanisms have also been linked with epilepsy in humans. Postmortem brain studies demonstrate monocyte infiltration and microglial and perivascular macrophage activation in epileptogenic human hippocampus samples (Broekaart et al. ). The onset of pediatric seizures has also been linked to inflammation triggered by a range of viruses, including human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6), other herpesviruses, and picornaviruses (Bartolini et al. ).
In summary, while the underlying pathophysiology that links the relatively high co-occurrence between seizures and ASD remains unknown, animal studies have demonstrated an association between immune activation and epileptiform discharges. Additionally, inflammation has been demonstrated both in human epilepsy and in ASD. Thus, while the co-occurrence may simply reflect general neuropathology, it is also possible that there is a causal relationship, possibly bidirectional, between ASD and seizures which is mediated by immune activation. Identifying this subset of ASD patients defined by either clinical seizures or EEG abnormalities may lead to the identification of a group of patients who would benefit from unique treatments such as antiepileptic medications or possibly immune-modulating agents.
Ear-nose-throat
Disorders of the ear, nose, and throat system are salient in ASD because hearing loss can exacerbate and confound the core ASD symptom domain of social and communication impairment. Even among typically developing children, sustained hearing impairment can result in language delays and behavioral disturbances. These effects are only magnified in the ASD population. As discussed below, otitis media is a medical condition which has been most extensively investigated within this body system in ASD. One recent study which analyzed data from the National Health Interview Survey showed that children with ASD were significantly more likely than those without ASD to have a respiratory allergy (18.73% vs. 12.08%, OR = 1.28, 95% CI 1.10–1.50) (Xu et al. ). Data on other common disorders that affect the nose and throat, such as allergic rhinitis and infectious pharyngitis, remain sparse.
Ear infections
The downstream effects of hearing loss in ASD are highlighted by a case study describing a 5-year-old boy with recurrent otitis media (middle ear infections), whose core and associated symptoms of autism including impaired social interactions and verbal communication, stereotypies, and aggression markedly improved within 1 month after middle ear surgery and adenoidectomy. At the 6-month follow-up visit, while he continued to prefer to play alone, had limited eye contact, and low frustration tolerance, he was much more engaged with his peers and his environment (Tajima-Pozo et al. ). This case illustrates how recurrent otitis media leading to sensory deprivation can exacerbate the symptoms of ASD. Furthermore, in children with ASD who have recurrent ear infections, it is important to assess for anatomic abnormalities that may be amenable to surgical intervention to reduce the risk of future infections.
Multiple case-cohort studies have demonstrated that the incidence of acute otitis media is elevated in children with ASD (Konstantareas and Homatidis ; Mason-Brothers et al. ; Adams et al. ). Furthermore, children with ASD are more likely to have otitis media–related complications such as effusions, otorrhea, and mastoiditis, and they are more likely to require the placement of pressure equalizing tubes (Adams et al. ). Recurrent otitis media infection is associated with lower cognitive functioning among children with ASD (Mason-Brothers et al. ), and earlier onset of otitis media infections has been correlated with ASD severity (Konstantareas and Homatidis ). Based upon these findings, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends more aggressive management of otitis media in children with ASD, including assessment of speech and language, prescribing hearing aids if hearing is impaired, a lower threshold for tympanostomy tube insertion, and hearing testing after the infection resolves to document improvement (American Academy of Family Physicians et al. ).
There are multiple possible explanations for the association between otitis media and ASD. Gastroesophageal reflux and anatomic craniofacial abnormalities, which are more prevalent in children with ASD, may be contributing factors. Additionally, the higher rates of otitis media, recurrent otitis media, and otitis media–related complications may be explained by immune dysfunction or chronic inflammation in a subset of ASD patients. Currently, no studies have reported whether there is a relationship between inflammatory biomarkers and children with ASD who suffer from recurrent otitis media infections.
Respiratory
The prevalence of respiratory disorders such as respiratory tract infections including viral upper respiratory tract infections, bronchitis, and pneumonia; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD); and restrictive interstitial lung diseases in the ASD population remains largely unstudied.
Asthma
There has been particular interest in studying whether an association exists between asthma, an inflammatory disorder of the airway associated with atopy which typically presents in childhood, and ASD. Due to the inflammatory nature of asthma, one might expect rates of asthma to be enriched in the ASD population. Several large studies have examined the prevalence of asthma in ASD; however, results have been inconsistent. A large cross-sectional study using the 2007 National Survey of Children’s Health dataset ( N = 77,951) in the USA demonstrated a higher prevalence of asthma among children with ASD, with an adjusted odds ratio of 1.19 (95% CI 1.03–1.36) (Kotey et al. ). A similar study based upon Kaiser Permanente Northern California data demonstrated that asthma was less common in children and young adults with ASD (OR = 0.83, 95% CI 0.76–0.90) (Zerbo et al. ). A third population-based study demonstrated that the rates of asthma did not differ between children with and without ASD (Lyall et al. ). Overall, a meta-analysis encompassing ten studies found that there was no association between asthma and ASD (Zheng et al. ).
Gastrointestinal
The gastrointestinal (GI) system is one of the body systems which has been more extensively studied in ASD, particularly given recent interest in the gut-brain axis, a bidirectional communication system between the intestinal epithelium and brain stem that is mediated by the vagus nerve (Collins et al. ). Despite this interest, the true prevalence of GI disorders in the ASD population remains unclear (Buie et al. ). Studies report a prevalence ranging from 9 to 91% and many prevalence studies suffer from methodologic limitations (Hsiao ). Despite this, a large retrospective study conducted across three tertiary care centers which included three general hospitals and one pediatric hospital, which compared over 14,000 individuals with ASD to the non-ASD population, reported a significantly higher prevalence of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (0.83% vs. 0.54%, 95% CI for difference in percentages 0.13–0.43%) and bowel disorders without IBD (11.74% vs. 4.5%, 95% CI 5.72–6.68%) in the ASD population (Kohane et al. ). Furthermore, a consensus statement on GI disorders in ASD concluded that “Despite the limitations in type and quality of available evidence, the preponderance of data were consistent with the likelihood of a high prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms and disorders associated with ASDs” (Buie et al. ). A large study of 2973 children (ages 2–17 years) with ASD assessed the frequency of chronic GI symptoms and their association with anxiety and sensory over-responsivity. Twenty-four percent of the sample reported at least one chronic GI symptom, and GI symptoms were highly associated with both sensory over-responsivity and anxiety (Mazurek et al. ). These data are suggestive of a subtype of ASD that is associated with GI conditions. The most common GI symptoms in individuals with ASD are constipation, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and encopresis that is a result of chronic constipation (Buie et al. ). As individuals with ASD often have language impairments, or difficulty reporting their symptoms, the identification of the presence of GI symptoms and the underlying cause can be challenging. Furthermore, an increase in problematic behaviors that are seemingly unrelated to GI disturbance can be markers for a GI problem. These behaviors can include agitation, increased repetitive behaviors, screaming, or crying (Buie et al. ). Treatment of GI symptoms with conventional treatments has been associated with improved behaviors (Horvath and Perman ).
Two genes associated with ASD which may have links with GI disturbance include MET which encodes the MET receptor tyrosine kinase and SLC6A4 which encodes SERT, an integral membrane transporter for serotonin (Hsiao ). The MET promoter SNP variant which is associated with ASD as discussed above is enriched in families with affected individuals with co-occurring GI conditions (Campbell et al. ). Further work supporting the role of MET in ASD and GI disorders assessed the serum levels of the MET receptor ligand, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). The results showed that children with ASD and co-morbid GI disease had lower serum levels of HGF than children with ASD without GI disease (Russo et al. ). Multiple rare variants of SERT have been identified in ASD, all of which result in increased SERT activity (Sutcliffe et al. ; Prasad et al. ). ASD-associated SERT polymorphisms likely disrupt GI serotonin metabolism, disrupting serotonin-related GI processes including gut motility, secretion, and sensation, providing a possible functional connection between genetic polymorphism and clinical phenotype of co-morbid ASD and GI disease (Hsiao ).
ASD is associated with altered gut microbiome profiles (Cao et al. ). Aberrant neuroimmune signaling between the gut microbiome and the brain during critical windows of neurodevelopment has also been implicated in the pathogenesis of ASD (Kelly et al. ). While the precise causative mechanisms for how the gut microbiome acts as a neuroimmunomodulator have yet to be elucidated, evidence for several possible mechanisms exists. For example, bacterial peptidoglycan derived from commensal gut bacteria has been shown to translocate into the brain and activate specific pattern recognition receptors of the innate immune system (Arentsen et al. ). It has also been hypothesized that the alteration in gut microbiome profile may result in chronic inflammation mediated by over-activation of toll-like receptors. Finally, the gut microbiome is involved in maturation and activation of microglia, the mononuclear phagocytic immune cells of the CNS. Germ-free mice display global defects in microglia, representing an impaired innate immune response (Erny et al. ). Taken together, these data suggest that even subtle alterations in the gut microbiome can result in aberrant neuroinflammatory processes, which if occurring at specific developmental time points may play a role in the pathogenesis of the development of the ASD phenotype (Kelly et al. ).
Susceptibility to GI inflammation has been documented in ASD. A recent study analyzing the National Health Interview Survey dataset demonstrated that children with ASD were more likely to have a food allergy than those without ASD (11.25% vs. 4.25%, OR = 2.29, 95% CI 1.87–2.81) (Xu et al. ). Individuals with ASD who have impaired language and communication skills may be unable to describe the pain and discomfort they experience from the GI inflammation associated with food allergy. Instead, physical discomfort may present with irritability, aggression, or self-injury, highlighting the need for clinicians to assess for and treat physical sources of distress, including GI inflammation and food allergy, when behavioral problems arise (McDougle ). Increased intestinal permeability has also been demonstrated in individuals with ASD as well as their relatives compared with normal controls. This study also demonstrated higher levels of fecal calprotectin, a marker of bowel inflammation, in individuals with autism and their relatives (de Magistris et al. ). It has been postulated that increased levels of bowel inflammation coupled with increased intestinal permeability may allow for translocation of gut materials into the bloodstream, activating the immune system. It remains unknown whether GI abnormalities in ASD directly contribute to the development of core autism symptoms or whether primary neural dysfunction associated with ASD causes problems in the GI tract.
Endocrine
Type 1 diabetes
Type 1 diabetes is a T cell–mediated autoimmune condition in which the insulin-producing beta cells of the pancreas are attacked, resulting in a deficit of insulin production and hyperglycemia. Although type 1 diabetes is one of the most common autoimmune diseases of childhood, the prevalence of type 1 diabetes in children with ASD has not been reported. Whether the prevalence of ASD is increased in children with type 1 diabetes remains controversial. A retrospective chart review study of 984 children from a diabetes clinic at a tertiary pediatric care center in Toronto, Canada, identified 9 cases of ASD, indicating a point prevalence of 0.9%, which was slightly higher than the CDC-reported prevalence of 0.8% in the general population at the time of publication (Freeman et al. ). In contrast to these findings, rates of ASD were not enriched in Diabetes Registries from Finland and Sardinia (Harjutsalo and Tuomilehto ; Iafusco et al. ). Metabolic control, as measured by a number of episodes of severe hypoglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis, is similar in type 1 diabetes patients irrespective of whether they have co-morbid ASD (Lemay et al. ).
Maternal diabetes, including the autoimmune subtype of diabetes, increases risk of ASD in offspring. A retrospective cohort study of patients from Kaiser Permanente Southern California hospitals assessed the ASD risk associated with maternal diabetes. Patients were stratified based upon whether the mother had type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, gestational diabetes, or no diabetes. Relative to the no diabetes group, the hazard ratios for exposure to type 1 diabetes was 2.36 (95% CI 1.36–4.12), type 2 diabetes was 1.45 (95% CI 1.24–1.70), and gestational diabetes was 1.30 (95% CI 1.12–1.51) (Xiang et al. ). These results suggest that the direct effects of hyperglycemia and potentially other factors, such as autoimmunity, may be associated with ASD risk.
Thyroid disease
Studies examining the relationship between thyroid dysfunction and ASD have yielded inconsistent results. Two studies reported no difference in triiodothyronine (T3), thyroxine (T4), or thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) between children with ASD and typically developing children (Abbassi et al. ; Cohen et al. ). In contrast to these findings, a study that screened serum proteins for biomarkers of ASD by comparing 30 boys (ages 2 to 8 years) with ASD to 30 typically developing boys isolated TSH as one of eleven proteins that predicted ASD with modest accuracy. TSH levels were found to be 30% lower in the ASD group with respective mean TSH levels of 1.42 ± 0.08 vs. 2.04 ± 0.15 mIU ( p < 0.006). TSH was found to be 94% sensitive and 60% specific for predicting ASD (Singh et al. ). One possibility for the inconsistencies between these studies may be that only a subtype of ASD is associated with thyroid dysfunction or immune dysfunction more generally.
The effect of folate receptor auto-antibodies on thyroid function in ASD has been a recent area of inquiry. When folate receptor auto-antibodies bind receptors on the thyroid gland, binding may decrease folate cell entry, which is required for thyroid hormone synthesis, or activate the immune system causing inflammation (Frye et al. ; Desai et al. ). Blocking folate receptor auto-antibodies increases TSH levels relative to the production of thyroid hormones, indicating decreased sensitivity of the thyroid to TSH stimulation in ASD that is mediated by auto-antibodies (Frye et al. ).
Whether dysregulation of thyroid hormones during the prenatal and neonatal phases contributes to the development of ASD has also been investigated. Maternal autoimmune thyroid disease has been demonstrated to be a risk factor in multiple studies, with a pooled OR of 1.29 (95% CI 1.14–1.45) reported in a recent meta-analysis (Chen et al. ). Neonatal thyroid dysfunction appears to have less of an impact on ASD. A two-site retrospective case-cohort study examined whether T4 levels at birth predict risk of ASD. Results from one site showed that very low T4 (less than 3rd percentile) was associated with ASD risk, but this finding did not reach statistical significance at the other site (Hoshiko et al. ). These findings were replicated in a larger, similarly designed population-based study which compared neonatal levels of T4 and TSH between ASD cases and controls. This study did not demonstrate any significant associations between neonatal T4 or TSH levels and subsequent ASD diagnosis. However, very low T4 levels (less than 5th percentile) seemed to modestly increase risk for ASD (RR = 1.67, 95% CI 1.08, 2.60) (Lyall et al. ).
In summary, while much remains to be studied on whether thyroid dysregulation contributes to ASD, maternal autoimmune thyroid disease is associated with an increased risk of ASD in offspring. Neonatal thyroid levels seem to be less contributory, and whether serum TSH and T3/T4 levels are markers for ASD in children remains controversial. Auto-antibodies to the folate receptor may mediate the role of thyroid dysregulation in ASD. Future work should attempt to clarify these mechanisms, identify clinical subtypes of ASD that may correlate with thyroid dysfunction, and better characterize the overall prevalence of autoimmune thyroid disorders in the ASD population.
Oxytocin and bone mineralization
Oxytocin, a peptide hormone produced by the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and stored in the posterior pituitary, is best known for its role in parturition and lactation. In addition to these functions, oxytocin is also involved in prosocial behaviors including mother-infant bonding, approach behaviors, and sexual activity (Ferguson et al. ; Lim and Young ). Plasma oxytocin levels are decreased in children with ASD, and higher oxytocin levels are associated with fewer verbal and social impairments (Husarova et al. ; Zhang et al. ). Thus, it has been hypothesized that a deficit in oxytocin function may underlie the social and communication deficits seen in ASD.
In humans, increased oxytocin levels have been associated with increased spine and hip bone mineral density score (Schorr et al. ). Multiple studies have demonstrated decreased bone mineralization in boys with ASD compared with typically developing boys (Neumeyer et al. , ). While the etiology of decreased bone mineralization in ASD is likely multifactorial, including behavioral components such as physical activity and diet, this clinical phenotype is also likely mediated by low oxytocin levels.
Oxytocin is currently being explored as a novel treatment for ASD. Small randomized controlled studies have demonstrated mixed results on the effect of intranasal administration of oxytocin on the social impairments of ASD (Dadds et al. ; Yatawara et al. ). In contrast to these early studies, the single, largest, randomized controlled trial to date assessing the effect of oxytocin on the social impairments of individuals with high-functioning ASD failed to demonstrate benefits (Yamasue et al. ). The authors of this study note that the study was limited by high placebo response rates and only temporary increases in serum oxytocin levels. Future work will need to more definitively determine whether oxytocin is an effective treatment for the core and associated symptoms of ASD, as well as its mechanism of action if effective. In rodent models, anti-inflammatory effects of oxytocin in the GI tract and the CNS have been demonstrated (Işeri et al. ; Yuan et al. ). Interestingly, a preclinical animal model of ASD demonstrated that oxytocin was associated with fewer repetitive behaviors and improved social interaction which was mediated by decreased oxidative stress and inflammation (Wang et al. ).
Taken together, these studies demonstrate that decreased bone mineralization is a medical condition that has been clearly associated with ASD. Decreased levels of the pituitary hormone, oxytocin, may be an explanatory physiologic link between the social and communication deficits of ASD, decreased bone mineralization, and increased inflammation of multiple organ systems.
Immune perspectives on treatment of autism spectrum disorder
FDA-approved psychopharmacologic treatments
While psychotropic medications are frequently used off-label to treat a range of target symptoms including mood and anxiety symptoms, hyperactivity and inattention, and irritability in ASD, only two medications, risperidone and aripiprazole, have received Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for ASD. Risperidone and aripiprazole, a dopamine receptor antagonist and dopamine receptor partial agonist, respectively, are second-generation antipsychotics which have been approved for the treatment of irritability in children and adolescents with ASD. An 8-week double-blind, placebo-controlled study demonstrated that children with ASD who were treated with risperidone (mean dose of 1.8 mg/day) had reductions in the Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC) Irritability subscale score of 56.9%, compared with a 14.1% decrease in the placebo group ( p < 0.001) (McCracken et al. ). Further analyses of these data demonstrated that risperidone led to improvements in restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped behaviors but did not affect social and communication impairments (McDougle et al. ). A second double-blind, placebo-controlled study of risperidone demonstrated that children and adolescents with ASD who were treated with risperidone (mean dose of 1.17 mg/day) had reductions in the ABC Irritability subscale score of 64%, compared with 31% in the placebo group (Shea et al. ). An 8-week double-blind, placebo-controlled, fixed-dose study comparing aripiprazole (5, 10, or 15 mg/day) to placebo among children (ages 6–17 years) with ASD demonstrated that all doses of aripiprazole were associated with reductions in the ABC Irritability subscale score (Marcus et al. ). Another 8-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of flexibly dosed aripiprazole (2–15 mg/day) in 98 children with ASD also demonstrated significant improvement in irritability (Owen et al. ).
While the molecular mechanisms by which second-generation antipsychotic medications affect behavioral symptoms of ASD remain unknown, in vitro and animal model studies have demonstrated anti-inflammatory effects associated with both risperidone and aripiprazole. Pretreatment of cultured glial cells with risperidone resulted in inhibition of IL-6-induced secretion of S100B, a protein marker of brain damage and inflammation (de Souza et al. ). Additionally, in a rat model of neuroinflammation, treatment with risperidone blocked increased gene expression of inflammatory cytokines in brain cortex cells (MacDowell et al. ). Finally, risperidone has been shown to block sustained systemic inflammation induced by MIA in rats. Administration of risperidone to adolescent rats whose mothers were exposed to poly(I:C) blocks the expression of the inflammatory signaling proteins, myelin basic protein isoform 3 (MBP1) and mitogen-activated kinase 1 (MAPK1) (Farrelly et al. ). Similarly, ex vivo stimulation of primary human peripheral blood mononuclear cells donated by healthy participants with aripiprazole resulted in decreased mRNA and protein concentrations of IL-6 and TNF-α, demonstrating that aripiprazole treatment is associated with decreased expression and secretion of inflammatory cytokines (Stapel et al. ). The anti-inflammatory effects associated with risperidone and aripiprazole observed in animal models and in vitro studies have not been replicated in patients with ASD. Secondary analysis of serum inflammatory markers from the 8-week double-blind placebo-controlled study on the effect of risperidone for irritability in ASD (McCracken et al. ) showed that risperidone-induced improvements in irritability were not associated with changes in any of the inflammatory markers measured, including epidermal growth factor (EGF), interferon-γ (IFN-γ), IL-13, IL-17, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), IL-1, and IL-1 receptor antagonist (Tobiasova et al. ).
Immune modulatory treatments
An array of immune modulatory treatments, including steroids, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors, and human immunoglobulin, has been investigated in pilot studies for the treatment of ASD with varying levels of success. Corticosteroids are anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive agents that are used to treat a wide variety of autoimmune disorders. An early case study described a 6-year-old boy with pervasive developmental disorder whose language abilities and behavior improved with corticosteroid treatment (Stefanatos et al. ). A retrospective study of steroid-treated children with regressive ASD demonstrated that steroid treatment was associated with improved language and behavior scores (Duffy et al. ). A 12-week open-label study of orally administered pregnenolone, a naturally occurring neurosteroid that is directly metabolized from cholesterol, assessed its effect on reducing irritability, as well as a number of secondary outcomes including sensory abnormalities, stereotypic behavior, hyperactivity, and inappropriate speech. Twelve adults with ASD were administered oral pregnenolone for 12 weeks. Pregnenolone was associated with an improvement in irritability, lethargy, and social withdrawal as measured with the ABC (Fung et al. ).
Celecoxib, a COX-2 inhibitor, exerts anti-inflammatory activity by reducing the production of cytokine-induced activation of COX-2 and inhibiting the NF-kB pathway. In a 10-week randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 40 children (ages 4–12 years) with ASD were randomized to risperidone plus celecoxib or risperidone plus placebo. The combination of risperidone plus celecoxib was found to be superior to risperidone alone in reducing irritability, social withdrawal, and stereotypy (Asadabadi et al. ).
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), immunoglobulin products derived from human plasma, has been used to treat a variety of inflammatory conditions and autoimmune diseases including primary immunodeficiencies, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, Kawasaki disease, and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Three small open-label studies of low-dose IVIG for ASD have demonstrated conflicting results on the core symptoms of ASD, with one study showing no impact (DelGiudice-Asch et al. ), one study demonstrating only modest benefit (Plioplys ), and the third study showing benefits (Gupta et al. ). The first open-label pilot study of high-dose IVIG administered to 14 children with ASD, and evidence of immune dysfunction demonstrated that the treatment was well tolerated and resulted in improvement in scores on the Clinical Global Impressions Scales (CGI-Severity (S) and CGI-I); the Autistic Mannerisms, Social Cognition, and Social Motivation subscales of the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS); and the Speech and Semantics subscales of the Children’s Communication Checklist (CCC-2) that were sustained for up to 12 weeks after the completion of treatment. These improvements were accompanied by reductions in several inflammatory biomarkers, including TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 levels (Melamed et al. ). A study on the tolerability of IVIG in a pediatric population ( N = 196) demonstrated that adverse effects occurred in about 25% of pediatric patients, with severe or medically significant adverse events occurring in 2% of patients (Nosadini et al. ).
In sum, while immune modulatory treatments have demonstrated varying levels of success, this line of investigation remains in its early stages, with many studies limited by small sample size, lack of appropriate controls, and non-blinded methods. Future work will need to address these issues and would also benefit from targeting a subtype of ASD with clearly delineated clinical markers or biomarkers that suggest inflammation.
Conclusion and future directions
ASD is a clinically and etiologically heterogeneous condition. The presence of immune dysregulation in a subset of individuals with ASD has been supported through family autoimmunity, immunogenetic, MIA, neuroinflammation, systemic inflammation, and immune modulatory treatment studies. Several lines of future research may more clearly provide causative evidence of a subtype of immune-mediated ASD. It will be important for future work to consider the time points at which inflammatory co-morbidities, ASD symptoms, and inflammatory biomarkers are assessed, as there are likely sensitive periods of development during which co-morbidities are more prevalent or measurement of biomarkers more relevant. Prospective longitudinal studies may be helpful in systematically assessing for medical co-morbidities and measuring inflammatory biomarkers in individuals with ASD (Tye et al. ). In terms of current evidence for inflammatory biomarkers, one study demonstrated neuroimaging evidence for increased microglial activation in individuals with ASD compared with control subjects (Suzuki et al. ). Further validation and identification of neuroimaging or inflammatory biomarkers that correlate with ASD symptom severity and change with treatment response, whole brain postmortem studies characterizing regions of brain inflammation in ASD, and more clearly established elevated rates of multi-system autoimmunity in individuals with ASD in future research would more conclusively support the hypothesis of an immune-mediated subtype of ASD. Additionally, identification of patterns of medical co-morbidities that are suggestive of this subtype of ASD is yet to be defined and may be suggestive of potential pathogenic mechanisms. Further identification of clinical co-morbidities or inflammatory conditions that are more prevalent in individuals with ASD may be helpful in defining a subtype of ASD where immune dysregulation is present. To date, the body systems which have been most extensively studied in ASD include the neurologic and GI systems.
Although gaps in evidence remain, there are converging lines of inquiry in support of the hypothesis that there is an immune-mediated subtype of ASD in which the social, communication, and behavioral symptoms represent only one manifestation of an underlying biological vulnerability. This hypothesis helps frame important questions that may guide both research directions and clinical practice. Future research that would aid in exploring this hypothesis and defining this subset of patients should include studies focusing on inflammation-related medical conditions, such as coronary artery disease, common infections, inflammatory skin conditions such as psoriasis and eczema, and obstructive lung diseases and cancer. Additionally, staging models that describe the progression of illness across body systems and the lifespan will also guide diagnostic approaches, treatment, and follow-up. A clearer picture of medical co-morbidities across the lifespan may eventually vastly alter how clinicians approach a medical history and physical examination for individuals with ASD. Clarification of anticipated medical and psychosocial issues during each developmental stage will allow clinicians to focus their visits and physical exam on high-yield areas. Ultimately, health supervision guidelines, akin to those available for Down syndrome (American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Genetics ), which provide primary care clinicians with guidance on features of the physical exam to assess, medical problems to evaluate, diagnostic testing to order, and anticipatory guidance and counseling for each stage of life, should be developed. These guidelines will likely empower physicians and other clinicians to provide primary care for individuals with ASD, improving the physical and psychosocial health outcomes of these individuals. It is critical to assess for co-occurring medical co-morbidities both at the time of initial ASD diagnosis, as well as during ongoing treatment management (Tye et al. ). Shifting our conceptualization of ASD from a heterogeneous neuropsychiatric symptom-focused condition of childhood to a multi-organ, lifelong, systemic medical illness mediated by autoimmune or inflammatory processes that begin in early life in a subset of patients may allow for timely identification and treatment of not only maladaptive behaviors but also chronic systemic inflammation-mediated medical co-morbidities. This in turn may reduce disease progression and burden and improve health outcomes and overall quality of life for a subset of individuals with ASD.