Introduction
With the rise in the development and availability of vaccines and therapeutic drugs, our life expectancies have generally increased in most countries. The average global life expectancies in 2015 as stated by WHO from their Global Health Observatory (GHO) data is 71.4 years ( Growing older , 2015). Currently, approximately 15% of the Australian population is aged over 65 years and this number is estimated to increase further ( Aging and aged care , 2017).
Aging is a complex phenomenon and includes a number of biological and psychological changes. With increasing age, the brain undergoes a number of functional and anatomical changes that involve our cognitive capacity. Cognitive aging is a common phenomenon in older people with memory and processing speed the most sensitive cognitive domains impaired by age (Arlinger et al. ). In addition, age is the greatest risk factor for dementia (Livingston et al. ) with one in ten Australians over 65 years suffer from dementia ( Aging and aged care , 2017).
Therefore, understanding the biological processes underpinning cognitive aging will be important if we are to develop new therapeutics for the elderly. One area that has not been subjected to much scientific research is the role of the gut bacteria in cognitive aging. We review the potential mechanisms and limited scientific research which connects the gut bacteria to changes in cognition as we age. This knowledge may help us better understand the complex mechanisms of cognitive aging for future research and lead to novel interventions to improve cognition in the elderly.
Gut microbiota
The microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract (gut microbiota) is dominated by bacteria residing in the gut (Qin et al. ). The concentration of bacterium increases from the ileum to the colon along the gut (Sender et al. ). The gut bacteria and humans are coevolving (Moeller et al. ) and contribute to several host metabolisms such as the metabolism of dietary complex polysaccharides into short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) which is a rich source of energy for the host (Gill et al. ) and is involved in stimulating pancreatic lipase (Hooper et al. ). Vitamins such as vitamin K and B12 are produced by gut microbiota (LeBlanc et al. ). In addition, gut bacteria regulate gut motility (Bercik et al. ) and also prevent pathogen colonisation in the gut (Kamada et al. ). In addition, gut bacteria influence the release of neurotransmitters such as serotonin, endocannabinoid ligands, ghrelin and cholecystokinin which can affect emotion, cognition and motor functions (Desbonnet et al. ; Gruninger et al. ). This close mutualistic relation between the bacteria and the host indicates an important role of bacteria in biological and psychological features of the host (Allen Andrew et al. ; Stilling et al. ).
The microbial colonisation in the gut starts during birth and reaches maturity in adults (Agans et al. ). According to 16srRNA gene studies, the major phyla of bacterium that harbour the gut are Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes (Arumugam et al. ) followed by Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria (Eckburg et al. ). The starting point of colonisation of gut bacteria in the host is highly debated. However, there are reports stating that the colonisation starts while the foetus is still in the uterus (Aagaard et al. ; Jiménez et al. ; Oh et al. ; Perez-Muñoz et al. ). It has been reported that the diversity of the bacterial colonies in an infant depends on various factors such as mode of delivery, feeding, use of antibiotics and surrounding environments. Vaginally delivered babies have rich colonies of commensal bacteria Lactobacilli, Bacteroides and Prevotella , while caesarean-born have rich colonisations of opportunistic bacteria Clostridium and Escherichia species (Bokulich et al. ; Nagpal et al. ). After birth, the stability of microbial colonies in babies depends on the type of feeding the baby receives i.e. breast-fed infants have Bifidobacterium, Lactobacilli, Staphylococci and Streptococci while the formula-fed have Bacteroides, Clostridia and Proteobacteria (Bokulich et al. ; Favier et al. ).
The composition of the gut bacteria stabilises on reaching adulthood and then degenerates with increasing age (O’Toole and Jeffery ). The rate of disintegration of gut bacteria with increasing age depends on several factors such as lifestyle, diet, physical activity, immune system functionality and use of medications (Claesson et al. ; Claesson et al. ; Odamaki et al. ). The gut bacterial composition of the elderly can be characterised by a decrease in Bacteroides , Bifidobacterium and Lactobacilli along with an increase in opportunistic bacteria such as Clostridium (Hopkins and Macfarlane ; Mitchell et al. ; O’Toole and Jeffery ; Odamaki et al. ). Besides alterations in microbial diversity, microbiota-related metabolites are also reduced which may be related to aging-related processes such as reduced appetite, frailty, weight loss, cognitive decline, hypertension, vitamin D deficiency, diabetes, arthritis and sarcopenia (Rampelli et al. ; Ríos-Covián et al. ; Turnbaugh et al. ; Ursell et al. ).
The evolving trends in metagenomics and studies on germ-free mice have improved our understanding of the gut-brain axis. The communication between gut and brain is facilitated by the vagus nerve which is the tenth cranial nerve and a key component of the parasympathetic nervous system connecting the abdomen to the brain while sensory fibres of the nerve connect the heart, lungs, pancreas, liver, stomach and intestines to the brain. The hypothesis that gut bacteria activate the vagus nerve originally derives from experiments on pathogenic and non-pathogenic bacteria. During Salmonella typhimurium infection, vagal sensory neuronal activity is attenuated (X. Wang et al. ). There is also evidence suggesting that the increase in c-fos, a marker for vagal sensory neuronal activity, can be mediated by Campylobacter jejuni which activates the visceral sensory nuclei in the brainstem (Goehler et al. ). Injection of Lactobacillus strain Lactobacillus johnsonii La1 in rats enhances the vagal nerve activity (Tanida et al. ), and the injection of Lactobacillus rhamnosus regulates the emotional behaviour mediated by vagus nerve (Bravo et al. ).
Cognitive aging
As we grow older, our cognitive abilities decrease. The decline of some cognitive functions begins in early adulthood, and the degree of decline varies from person to person (Salthouse ; Wilson et al. ). Some older individuals experience dramatic deterioration, while others experience very little impairment (Christensen and Kumar ). This may be explained by individual variation in variables such as education, gender and genetics as well as environmental and lifestyle risk factors such as tobacco consumption, exercise and weight (Christensen and Kumar ). In terms of the broad categories of cognition that are affected by age, crystallised intelligence (measures of knowledge) are much less affected with increasing age than other cognitive domains such as fluid intelligence (the ability to learn) or long-term memory (Christensen and Kumar ). Decline in memory is most prominent with specific components of memory so that episodic, working and recognition memory are the most sensitive to age (Belblidia et al. ; Mather ; Robitsek et al. ; Salthouse ). Data from longitudinal studies such as the Canberra Longitudinal Study and the Einstein Aging Study strongly support age-related deterioration in memory (Christensen et al. ; Silwinski and Buschke, ). The Whitehall II study has also reported that reasoning and verbal fluency decline with age in addition to memory domains (Singh-Manoux et al. ). This study examined cognitive function over a period of 10 years in participants aged between 45 and 70 years and showed that reasoning was impaired with increasing age while crystallised measures such as vocabulary were unaffected until very old age. In contrast to this, data derived from the Seattle Longitudinal Study suggest changes in vocabulary and perceptual speed with age (Schaie and Willis ) with an acceleration after 60 years of age. Differences in the results of these studies may be due to the different batteries utilised to measure cognition and therefore to a different range of domains included. For instance, many studies use standardised computerised cognitive test batteries to test cognition. Yet, many computerised cognitive test batteries do not provide complete information about overall cognitive performance (Pase and Stough ). In addition to this, lack of reliability and standardisation in cognitive tasks used across studies and also the way that cognitive test data are analysed and reported hinders the application of this knowledge in neurobiological research (Pase and Stough ), including research on the relationship between the biome and cognition. Grouping cognitive outcomes into broader cognitive domains may help researchers to better understand past findings while also revealing gaps in our knowledge (Schneider and McGrew ). The grouping of cognitive test data into higher order cognitive domains also reduces the number of statistical comparisons thereby reducing the chances of type I error and allowing researchers to draw clearer conclusions (Pase and Stough ). In order to create a valid and standardised grouping that can be applied universally, it should be consistent across cognitive studies and also theoretically meaningful (Pase and Stough ). Numerous models have been proposed describing human cognition, however, many lack empirical validation. To date, the Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) model is the most accepted and empirically supported model of cognition (Ackerman and Lohman ; Keith and Reynolds ), and this model provides a delineation of the underlying cognitive process from the cognitive tasks used in any given study (Pase and Stough ). The CHC model integrates two prominent psychometric models i.e. Cattell-Horn and Carroll models (Schneider and McGrew ) and is a three-stratum model comprising general, broad and narrow abilities (Fig. 1 ). The general abilities include the general intelligence or ‘g’ factor. The broad abilities outlined in the CHC model are fluid intelligence, comprehension-knowledge (crystallised intelligence), short-term memory, visual processing, auditory processing, long-term storage and retrieval, processing speed, reaction/decision speed, reading and writing and qualitative knowledge (McGrew ). Apart from these, domain-specific knowledge, tactile abilities, kinaesthetic abilities, olfactory abilities, psychomotor abilities and psychomotor speed also comprise second order factors (McGrew ). We argue that understanding the relationship between cognition and the complex microbiome will require a standardised and unitary model of cognition in which the results from many studies utilising a range of cognitive measures can be grouped and compared. As research examining the relationship between the microbiome and cognition is in its infancy, the use of the CHC model may accelerate our understanding of future research data. The CHC can be used across any cognitive data set, requiring researchers to factor their cognitive data into the CHC second order domains. If this cannot be done then information about test loadings on each domain is readily available for most cognitive tests. Fig. 1 The CHC model illustrating a comprehensive taxonomy of different cognitive processes across three levels of measurement
Biological factors and cognition
There are a number of biological factors that affect cognitive aging including changes in brain structure and functions. The aging brain undergoes various structural changes including an increase in cerebrospinal fluid and a decrease in brain tissue (Stafford et al. ; Zatz et al. ). Age-related changes to brain structure may involve the loss of neurons (Fjell Anders and Walhovd Kristine ). In addition to the loss of neurons, synapses and synaptic spines are also reduced with increasing age (Fjell Anders and Walhovd Kristine ). However, the biological mechanisms underlying cognitive decline are complex and not well understood but cognitive decline is most likely multifactorial including genetic factors, several pathological processes including plaques, infarcts, vascular processes, etc.; we now review two processes that are most likely to be important in terms of the influence of the microbiome: oxidative stress and inflammation. Besides age-related structural changes of the brain, oxidative stress and inflammation also increase with age (Franceschi et al. ; Tsay et al. ) and these processes may be essential in understanding any relation between cognition and the microbiome.
Oxidative stress, aging and the microbiome
Oxidative stress is the imbalance in the body ameliorating reactive oxygen species (ROS). The majority of ROS is produced from mitochondria through the electron transport chain and is converted into oxygen and hydrogen peroxide by the antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase (SOD) (Pauling ) and then catalase acts upon the hydrogen peroxide producing water and oxygen. The accumulation of ROS in the body is prevented by antioxidants such as vitamin C and vitamin E, which inhibit the oxidation of free radical producing molecules, thereby reducing the load of oxidative stress that can damage cells (Ching Kuang ; Frei et al. ). Depletion of antioxidants such as glutathione can also be detrimental to brain function leading to neuronal metabolic stress in synaptic signalling and cognitive deficits (Gonzalez-Fraguela et al. ). With increasing age, the activities of SOD and catalase is altered leading to accumulation of ROS in the brain (Tsay et al. ) and this accumulated ROS damages the mitochondrial DNA and leads to the onset of neurodegenerative diseases (Fig. 2 ) (Lin and Beal ). Aging decreases the expression of anti-oxidant genes in the brain and increases inflammatory and pro-oxidant gene expression (Godbout et al. ; Lee Seung et al. ). ROS can also initiate low-grade inflammation with high levels of ROS in brain cells stimulating immune cells causing the production of inflammatory markers such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6 and tumour necrosis factor-α (TNFα) (Gonzalez-Fraguela et al. ). Animal studies have reported that dimethyl fumarate, an antioxidant and immunosuppressant, can reduce oxidative stress and improve memory (Majkutewicz et al. ). Recent research from our laboratory has also provided evidence that increased oxidative stress measured by increased F2 Isoprostanes are related to poorer cognition in a large sample of older participants. These cognitive domains included memory (Downey et al. ) and processing speed (Camfield et al. ) both of which are sensitive to age. Fig. 2 Mechanisms involving gut bacteria in neuroinflammation and cognitive decline. Age, ROS, and inflammation can lead to gut dysbiosis or leaky gut. LPS released into the circulation as a result of increased gut permeability bind to TLR receptors on monocytes and microglia. This increases the load of pro-inflammatory cytokines in systemic circulation leading to neuroinflammation. In contrast, gut bacteria can influence maturation and proliferation of microglia and protect from neuroinflammation
Gut bacteria have been linked to changes in mitochondria and ROS (Clark and Mach ). Lactobacilli , a dominant type of gut bacteria, is reported to initiate the cellular ROS production in both in vitro and in vivo studies (Kumar et al. ) and some of the strains of Lactobacillus can produce antioxidant enzymes, catalase and superoxide dismutase that protects against host ROS and regulates anti-inflammatory immune responses (LeBlanc et al. ). Further, gut bacterial metabolite butyrate can reduce NADH/NAD which is a donor of mitochondrial electron transfer chain (Donohoe et al. ). Butyrate has also shown to reduce oxidative stress (Rose et al. ). Other bacterial-derived compounds such as indole-3-propionic acid (IPA) have shown to re-establish the mitochondrial respiration and membrane potential in aging mouse models (Poeggeler et al. ).
The ability of microbiota to influence mitochondrial function might be due to the prokaryotic derivation of mitochondria. Phylogenetic studies indicate that mitochondria are derived from alpha-proteobacteria (Gabaldón and Huynen , ) and the mitochondrial protein targeting sequences are similar to that of bacteria (Lucattini et al. ). The mitochondria are also susceptible to antibiotics (Kalghatgi et al. ). This close relation between bacterial and host cells might be a reason that gut bacteria are intrinsically involved in oxidative stress (Saint-Georges-Chaumet and Edeas ). Apart from activating the mitochondria to produce ROS, gut bacteria are capable of producing ROS in an independent manner (Neish and Jones ). This is facilitated by activation of NADPH oxidase 1 (Nox1) and thus increase in cellular ROS suppresses the immune system (Neish and Jones ). Increased levels of ROS upon aging can also be attributed to the NOX1 (Sahoo et al. ). The increased levels of ROS due to mitochondrial dysfunction affects the gut epithelial barrier dysfunction leading to trans-epithelial flux of Escherichia coli (A. Wang et al. ) and the administration of antioxidants restores the gut epithelial barrier (A. Wang et al. ). Similarly, abnormal mitochondrial structure is associated with gut inflammation (Nazli et al. ). This indicates a role of the ROS in modulating the gut epithelial barrier and leading to inflammation of the gut.
Immune system, aging and the microbiome
The immune system facilitates the protective response against potential pathogens. When a pathogen or disease-causing stimuli is encountered in the body, the innate immune system is activated and necessary inflammatory agents such as leukocytes (white blood cells), macrophages and cytokines reach the target site. Cytokines are the inflammatory signalling molecules that include different types of interleukins (IL) and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α). Pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 and TNF-α increase inflammation whereas anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, IL-10 decrease inflammation. The increased circulatory cytokines are capable of activating the microglia and astrocytes, the immune cells of CNS. In addition to this, the number of B cells and T cells are reduced with increasing age. Older individuals have fewer mature T cells and higher immature T cells (Mazari and Lesourd ). This leads to reduced numbers of T cells in circulation. B cells produce secretory IgA and play an important role in maintenance of intestinal homeostasis. The secretory IgA responses are bacterial species specific (Peterson et al. ). However, certain bacterial species such as Suttrella can degrade IgA (Moon et al. ). In normal conditions, T-regulatory cells (Treg) help in the survival of IgA in the intestine (Cong et al. ). However, with increasing age, the activity of antigen presenting cell activity is reduced leading to decline in dendritic cells. The activated immune cells in the brain can spread the inflammatory signals throughout the CNS leading to low-grade inflammation of the brain. Low-grade inflammation is defined as chronic production of inflammatory factors in low grade triggered by physiological mechanisms rather than from an infection. This low-grade inflammation in the brain can modulate the neuronal activation and lead to physiological and behavioural changes such as illness, fever, lethargy, increased sleep, decreased appetite and social withdrawal (Konsman et al. ). Repeated exposure to inflammatory markers leads to sickness behaviour featuring weight loss and reduction in food intake (Musaelyan et al. ).
Age is associated with low-grade inflammation and is known as inflammaging (Franceschi et al. ) with increases in the pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, high-sensitive C-reactive protein (hsCRP), IL-6 and IL-18 (Franceschi et al. ). In addition to pro-inflammatory cytokines, the T-cell and B-cell function is also impaired in inflammaging (Frasca and Blomberg ). With aging, the microglia are hyper activated (Rawji et al. ).
Prolonged exposure of the brain to inflammatory cytokines can impair cognition with increasing age. The increased level of pro-inflammatory cytokine, IL-6, is negatively associated with Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), suggesting the possible role of pro-inflammatory markers in cognitive decline (Wright et al. ). Further, high levels of IL-6 or CRP can increase the risk of cognitive decline by 24% (Yaffe et al. ). Studies on aged mice have shown memory deficiencies following an acute inflammation (Barrientos et al. ; Chen et al. ) and increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1β after acute inflammation impairs memory in rats (Barrientos et al. ). Moreover, systemic inflammation due to increased levels of circulating cytokines CRP and TNF-α in elderly people is negatively correlated with semantic memory (Arfanakis et al. ).
Age-associated cognitive decline may be attributed to the decreased synaptic connections in the brain (Dickson et al. ; VanGuilder Heather et al. ). Synaptic connections depend on the expression and signalling of several neurotrophic factors such as nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1). Although the levels of BDNF are not affected with age (Hofer et al. ; Lapchak et al. ), it is greatly stimulated following increased inflammation (Cortese et al. ). Increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokine, IL-1β reduces the transcription of BDNF in the hippocampus (Patterson ), thereby reducing the synaptic connections which can affect learning. In contrast to BDNF, the levels of IGF-1 is reduced in older brains (Deak and Sonntag ; Sonntag et al. ). This decrease in IGF-1 may initiate microglia-mediated inflammation (Dodge et al. ). Furthermore, diminished IGF-1 signalling impairs hippocampal-dependent spatial learning (S. Logan et al. ) and intracerebroventricular injection of IGF-1 improves working memory (Markowska et al. ). Brain inflammation has been linked to pathogenesis of various chronic neurodegenerative disorders (Blasko et al. ) such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease. In Alzheimer’s disease (AD), accumulation of the neurotoxin amyloid-β plaques in the brain correlates with inflammatory markers (Kuo et al. ). When the AD transgenic mouse is treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a cell membrane component of gram-negative bacteria, substantial increase of IL-1β has been observed (Sly et al. ). This increased inflammation can be attributed to the increased microglial activation in the hippocampus leading to loss of cognitive function and memory (Cagnin et al. ). These studies demonstrate an important relationship between cognition and inflammation.
The mechanism by which gut bacteria influence the CNS is complex (Collins et al. ) and may involve several pathways. This communication can be through the vagus nerve, the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA) or enteric nervous system (ENS). Gut bacteria–derived proteins can also influence the brain by producing metabolic precursors such as tryptophan and neurotransmitters (Heijtz et al. ; Sampson and Mazmanian ). Acetate, the smallest SCFA, can cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and signals satiety by activating the hypothalamic neurons (Frost et al. ). Ingestion of butyrate or colonisation of GF mice with SCFA producing bacteria such as Clostridium tyrobutyricum, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron decrease the BBB permeability (Braniste et al. ; Kim et al. ; Yoo et al. ). However, the exact mechanism by which SCFAs regulate the BBB permeability is not clear. Disturbance of the gut permeability can displace bacteria or bacterial components (LPS) into the systemic circulation. The disturbance of gut permeability is confounded by various factors such as dietary alterations associated with age, medication use, medical conditions, hospital stay, infections, etc. The disturbance of the gut permeability can alter our microbial composition. The alterations in the microbiota can result from exposure to various environmental factors including diet, drugs and pathogens that can trigger local and systemic inflammation. The LPS stimulate increases in circulating pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, IL-2, TNF-α and IL-1β (Scott et al. ). Further, increases in pathobionts in centenarians marked a decrease in the Faecalibacterium prauznitzii which has reported anti-inflammatory properties (Biagi et al. ) and a decrease of butyrate-producing bacteria leads to increase of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-8 (Biagi et al. ). The bacterial strains belonging to the genus of Bacteroides and Lactobacillus regulate the production of Th17 and dendritic cells and lead to CNS inflammation (Christensen et al. ; Fung et al. ; Ivanov et al. ). Studies on gut bacteria in centenarians suggest an increase in Firmicutes which is an opportunistic pro-inflammatory bacteria (Franceschi et al. ) suggesting a relationship between gut bacteria and inflammaging. Changes in the gut bacterial composition favouring Proteobacteria and decreased butyrate-producing bacteria leads to increased production of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-8 in centenarians (Biagi et al. ). This shows the possible relation between microbiota and inflammation with age.
Activation of the immune system after exposure to bacterial components is also a possible pathway to influence the CNS (Sampson and Mazmanian ). The bacterial components such as bacterial lipoproteins, double-stranded RNA, and LPS are collectively known as Microbial-Associated Molecular Patterns (MAMPs). The MAMPs are recognised via pattern recognition receptors like Toll-like receptors (TLR). The TLRs are expressed on the innate immune cells including neurons and glial cells of the CNS (Crack Peter and Bray Paula ). LPS can initiate CNS inflammation through TLR4-expressing brain resident cells (Chakravarty and Herkenham ; L. Qin et al. ). In addition to activating innate immune system, gut bacteria are capable of regulating peripheral immune cells through their metabolites in CNS (Koh et al. ; Rooks and Garrett ). SCFAs reduce autoimmune encephalomyelitis and axonal damage mediated by T reg cells (Haghikia et al. ). Segmented filamentous bacteria of gut epithelium promote development of T helper 17 cells (TH17) to produce IL-17A (Gaboriau-Routhiau et al. ; Ivanov et al. ). Further, introducing segmented filamentous bacteria into germ-free mice can promote autoimmune encephalomyelitis by activating TH17 (Lee et al. ). Intestinal Bacteroides fragilis induces anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 production by activating regulatory T (T reg ) cells in the colon (Round et al. ; Round and Mazmanian ).
Additionally, gut bacteria can influence the maturation of microglial cells in the brain by producing SCFAs (Huuskonen et al. ). Studies on germ-free mice have revealed defective microglial density in the brain and when treated with LPS, microglia lacked the CD44, CD62L and MHC-II markers on them (Erny et al. ). Studies on germ-free mice have also revealed that microglia express low mRNA levels for several activation markers such as Stat1, Jak3, B2m etc. (Erny et al. ). In contrast to these data, the primary factor for microglial proliferation, maturation, function and survival i.e. colony stimulation factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R) was found to be an increase in germ-free conditions (Chitu et al. ; Elmore et al. ; Erblich et al. ; Kierdorf and Prinz ). As the proliferation rate is increased, hyper-ramified and microglial density was observed in different brain regions (Erny et al. ). However, when the germ-free mice were supplemented with SCFAs for 4 weeks, the microglial number, function and morphology were restored (Erny et al. ). This demonstrates the potential role of microbiota in neuroinflammation. Further, when germ-free mice were colonised with specific bacterial strains such as Bacteroides distasonis (ASF 519) , lactobacillus salivarius (ASF 361) and Clostridium cluster XIV (ASF 356) (ASF- altered Schaedler flora), the abnormalities in the microglia were not restored. This suggests that microbiota affects the microglial regulation and may require a diverse population of microbiota (Erny et al. ).
Stress and aging
The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is one of the communicating pathways between gut microbiota and the brain. The HPA axis coordinates the defensive responses to various stressors by producing glucocorticoids (cortisol and corticosterone), mineralocorticoids (aldosterone) and catecholamines (dopamine, epinephrine and noradrenaline). These hormones modulate the immune system and also gastrointestinal function (Galley and Bailey ; Glaser and Kiecolt-Glaser ). Cortisol secretion depends on the person’s wake-sleep cycles and exposure to light-dark cycles, endogenously generated circadian rhythm (Kupfer et al. ). HPA axis contains a negative-feedback mechanism to regulate glucocorticoid levels by regulating secretion of precursors corticotropin-releasing hormone and adrenocorticotropic hormone. Glucocorticoids strongly influence the phenotype, survival and functions of monocytes, macrophages and glial cells and their receptors are ubiquitously expressed on immune cells (Sierra et al. ). When under stress, the monocytes are primed leading to changes in microglia phenotype and resulting in neuroinflammation (Rea et al. ). Chronic stress leads to cognitive impairment, anxiety, depression and reduced sociability in adults (Prenderville et al. ).
Interventions
Higher intakes of refined sugar and saturated fat has been related to cognitive decline (Francis and Stevenson ) and this type of diet reduces the microbial diversity and affects cognition by triggering chronic low-grade inflammation (Proctor et al. ). Healthy and balanced diet such as Mediterranean diet features high consumption of fruits, vegetables, legumes, unrefined cereals and nuts; moderate consumption of fish, poultry and dairy products; low consumption of red meat production, use of olive oil; and regular to moderate wine consumption (Willett et al. ). Adherence to Mediterranean diet improves cognitive function (Cao et al. ) by altering the gut bacterial diversity favouring the Bifidobacterium:E.coli ratio, growth of Bacteroides and production of SCFAs (Mitsou et al. ). In addition, intake of plant or animal-based diet, vitamins, minerals, polyphenols and dietary fibre also play an important role in shaping the gut microbiota (Proctor et al. ; Tengeler et al. ). These studies show that diet plays a key role in shaping the gut bacteria.
Probiotics and prebiotics
Probiotics can lower systemic inflammation and decrease oxidative stress reducing anxiety (Bravo et al. ; Logan and Katzman ). Experimental data suggest consumption of prebiotics and probiotics may improve cognition, hippocampal plasticity and brain mitochondrial function by reducing inflammation (Chunchai et al. ). In addition, probiotics also improve aging by stimulating immune responses and reducing oxidative stress. (Kwon et al. ; Nakagawa et al. ). Lactobacilli and Bifidobacteria are the most familiar probiotics that have shown positive health effects and may also improve mood and anxiety symptoms in IBD and chronic fatigue syndrome patients by reducing inflammation (A. C. Logan and Katzman ; Shadnoush et al. ). Probiotics may also improve mood and cognition modulating oxidative stress and reducing the levels of pro-inflammatory markers such as IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α (Wallace and Milev ). Lactobacillus plantarum CCFM10 and RS15-3 protect against D-gal induced oxidative stress by suppressing the abundance of Clostridium (Zhao et al. ). Bifidobacterium exhibits anti-inflammatory properties by increasing anti-inflammatory cytokine production (Messaoudi et al. ). These studies, although preliminary, provide evidence for the potential role of probiotics in modulating the cognitive health in the elderly. However, narrative reviews tend to be over enthusiastic. A systemic review on this topic suggests that the use of probiotics as a therapeutic intervention in psychological conditions such as stress, mood and anxiety is still in its infancy and more clinical data is needed to draw conclusions about efficacy (Romijn and Rucklidge ).
Conclusion
Age is associated with increased oxidative stress and inflammation leading to cognitive decline. Recent evidence suggests that gut microbiota plays an important role in initiating these factors. Gut microbiota plays a crucial role in initiating the oxidative stress response by modulating mitochondrial function. The ROS thus formed can initiate a low-grade inflammation. In addition, gut permeability increases with age. Gut permeability leads to release of microbes and microbial contents into the bloodstream leading to activation of the immune system and the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. This increases the load of circulatory pro-inflammatory markers. The prolonged exposure of the brain to inflammatory markers leads to cognitive decline. The alterations in the gut microbiota with increasing age can also result from exposure to various environmental factors, including diet, drugs and infections that can trigger both local and systemic inflammation altering the microbial composition and barrier function. Further, studies on probiotics and diet have provided preliminary evidence that specific strains of gut bacteria can improve cognition by reducing oxidative stress and inflammation. However, more research is needed in this field to understand the exact pathway of how gut microbiota modulates cognitive function. The study of the relation between the microbiome and cognition with age is complex and in its infancy. We suggest the use of cognitive taxonomies such as the CHC model for future studies allowing easier comparison for higher order cognitive domains across past and future studies.