Introduction
Pavlovian fear or threat conditioning in laboratory rodents is widely used to study the substrates of learning and memory in the mammalian brain (LeDoux and Daw ). One reason for the use of this model is that conditioned fear is thought to contribute to anxiety disorders, such as post-traumatic stress (PTSD), in people. A standard protocol to produce conditioned fear consists in exposing rodents to pairings of an innocuous stimulus, such as a tone, and an innate source of danger, typically a brief but aversive foot shock. Rodents quickly learn that the tone signals the imminent arrival of the aversive stimulation, expressing this learning when re-exposed to the now conditioned auditory stimulus (CS) in a range of defensive responses indicative of fear or threat in people. A second reason for the use of this model is that extinction of conditioned fear is a goal of exposure therapies used to treat PTSD and other anxiety disorders, such as social and specific phobias. Extinction occurs when the signaling relation between the CS and the aversive unconditioned stimulus (US) is broken by repeated presentations of the CS in the absence of the US. The responses produced by the signaling relation decline across the CS-alone presentations and eventually cease. Fear of the CS is said to be extinguished. Theories that identified learning with a single construct, such as the strength of the CS-US association, explained extinction as the weakening and ultimate erasure of this strength (e.g., Rescorla and Wagner ). However, various phenomena, such as spontaneous recovery, rapid re-acquisition, renewal and reinstatement, show that at least some of the original CS-US association remains intact in spite of the fact that the CS fails to elicit responding. Such phenomena have led to the view that the CS-alone presentations generate some form of inhibitory learning that is superimposed on the CS-US association and that prevents its retrieval and/or expression in conditioned responding.
The fear that is re-acquired, renewed, reinstated, or spontaneously recovered after extinction can, of course, be eliminated through further CS-alone exposures. The available evidence suggests that this re-extinction engages the same neural circuits as those required for initial extinction and deepens the learning that accrued during initial extinction (see Delamater and Westbrook for a review of this evidence). This has been taken to imply that re-extinction strengthens connections between prefrontal and limbic circuits that are established during initial extinction. However, at least under some circumstances, the roles of prefrontal and limbic circuit components differ in the two types of extinction, suggesting that re-extinction is not always achieved via a simple re-capitulation of neuronal processes involved in initial extinction.
This paper reviews the literature on re-extinction of conditioned fear. It consists in three parts. The first describes the neural circuits involved in the extinction of conditioned fear, with a particular focus on the roles of the basolateral amygdala complex (BLA) and the infralimbic region of the medial prefrontal cortex (IL). The second examines the role of the BLA in re-extinction of conditioned fear. The third examines the role of the IL in extinction and re-extinction of conditioned fear. The content is generally relevant to other literatures showing that the conditions under which learning occurs determine its substrates in the brain (Holmes et al. , ; Lay et al. ; Leidl et al. ; for review see Parsons ), and more specifically, that the substrates of learning and relearning are not always the same: e.g., prior training in a watermaze renders learning about new spatial tasks independent of receptors required for initial learning (Bannerman et al. ; Saucier and Cain ) and pre-exposure to a context changes the neural circuits that support context fear conditioning (Huff et al. ). However, this paper focuses exclusively on the extinction and re-extinction of conditioned fear. Its goal is to identify commonalities and differences in the roles of the BLA and IL in extinction and re-extinction and to describe a theory of re-extinction that accounts for these commonalities and differences.
The roles of the amygdala and IL in extinction of conditioned fear
The amygdala is an almond-shaped structure located in the medial temporal lobe. It has two main sub-regions: the basolateral amygdala complex (BLA), which consists in the lateral (LA) and basal amygdala (BA) nuclei, and the central amygdala (CeA) which consists in lateral (CeL) and medial (CeM) divisions (Paré ; Olucha-Bordonau et al. ). According to a widely accepted model, these sub-regions play distinct roles in the formation, storage, and retrieval of Pavlovian conditioned fear. During fear conditioning, inputs from the thalamus, visual, auditory, and somatosensory cortex converge in the BLA (Li et al. ; LeDoux ). This convergence leads to activation of N -methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors on glutamatergic projection neurons in the LA (Ehrlich et al. ), which triggers an array of intracellular signaling processes that are critical for formation of the CS-shock association (Goosens and Maren ; Marek et al. ; Dunsmoor et al. ). The formation of this association is typically identified with changes in synaptic efficiency, such that subsequent exposures to the CS more effectively excite LA and BA neurons, and thereby the intra-amygdala pathways normally activated by innate sources of danger, such as the aversive US (Paré ; Pape and Paré ; Sah et al. ; Marek et al. ). These pathways project to the CeA which coordinates the various components of defensive reactions via downstream projections to the periaqueductal gray (PAG; freezing), hypothalamus (changes in heart rate and blood pressure, release of stress hormones), and regions of the basal ganglia (attention; see Swanson ; Sah et al. ; Paré ; Ciocchi et al. ; Benarroch ; Paré and Duvarci ).
The amygdala also plays a critical role in the extinction of conditioned fear (LeDoux ; Dunsmoor et al. ). According to the model just described, extinction reduces the capacity of the CS to activate intra-amygdala pathways from the BLA to CeA; hence, it fails to activate CeA-dependent conditioned defensive reactions such as freezing. Several mechanisms contribute to this reduction in neurotransmission. First, CS-alone presentations in extinction activate a population of neurons in the BA, and this activation precedes the behavioral change from fear expression (freezing) to fear extinction (no freezing). These so-called extinction neurons differ from another population of cells, “fear neurons,” that show an increase in firing during fear conditioning and are held to be critical for expression of CeA-dependent conditioned defensive reactions. Extinction neurons directly inhibit activation of fear neurons, thereby disrupting neurotransmission from the BLA to CeA and the expression of these reactions (Herry et al. ). Second, during CS-alone presentations, communication between the BLA and CeA is attenuated by increased input to the amygdala from the infralimbic region (IL) of the medial prefrontal cortex (Herry et al. ; Senn et al. ). Specifically, the IL has been suggested to attenuate communication between the BLA and CeA via its projections to the extinction neurons that were just described, GABAergic cells in the intercalated cell masses, and/or neurons in the CeL. By attenuating communication between the BLA and CeA, the IL prevents the CS from activating its downstream targets in the CeA, and therefore, the expression of conditioned fear.
Consistent with this model, extinction of conditioned fear requires neuronal activity in the BLA (Kim and Richardson ; Laurent et al. ; but see Anglada-Figueroa and Quirk ) and IL (Laurent and Westbrook ), as well as functional connectivity between the mPFC and amygdala (Berretta et al. ; Bloodwood et al. ; Cho et al. ). However, the roles of these regions in the different stages of extinction are dissociable. Three lines of evidence show that activity in the BLA is required for acquisition and consolidation of the learning produced by extinction but is not required for its retrieval and/or expression. First, BLA infusions of an NMDA receptor antagonist (e.g., AP5 or ifenprodil) impair extinction when they occur before, but not after, an extinction training session (Falls et al. ; Lee and Kim ; Sotres-Bayon et al. ; see also Mao et al. ; Parkes and Westbrook ; Holmes et al. ; Wu et al. ). These pre-training infusions disrupt the retention of extinction in a subsequent drug-free test (rats that receive these infusions exhibit high levels of freezing in both cases). Second, a pre-training BLA infusion of a MEK inhibitor (U0126, an upstream regulator of ERK/MAPK; Lu et al. ; Herry et al. ), a protein synthesis inhibitor (anisomycin; Duvarci et al. ; Pedroso et al. ), or an antisense oligodeoxynucleotide of the IEG, Arc (Onoue et al. ) spare the within-session extinction of CS-elicited freezing, but impair the retention of this extinction in a drug-free test. Third, inactivation of extinction neurons in the BLA pre- test has no effect on the level of CS-elicited freezing: rats that receive these infusions exhibit the same level of freezing as vehicle-infused controls (Herry et al. ). Thus, the role of the BLA in fear extinction is specific to the formation and consolidation of the inhibitory learning; it plays no role in its retrieval and/or expression. Moreover, the acquisition of extinction, but not its consolidation, requires activation of NMDA receptors in the BLA; and the consolidation of extinction, but not its acquisition, requires intracellular processes that occur downstream of NMDA receptor activation, including ERK/MAPK signaling and de novo protein synthesis.
In contrast to this role of the BLA, neuronal activity in the IL is not required for the acquisition of fear extinction, but is required for its consolidation, retrieval, and/or expression. Again, there are three lines of evidence. First, pre-training IL infusions of muscimol leave intact the within-session decline in freezing across the CS-alone presentations (Laurent and Westbrook ; Morawska and Fendt ). However, a pre-test IL infusion of muscimol impairs the retrieval and/or expression of the already learned extinction (Laurent and Westbrook ; but see Do-Monte et al. ). Second, post -training IL infusions of muscimol (Laurent and Westbrook ); the NMDA receptor antagonist, CPP (Burgos-Robles et al. ); or the MAPK inhibitor, PD098059 (Hugues et al. ), also impair the expression of extinction in a drug-free test. Relative to controls, rats that receive any of these infusions exhibit more CS-elicited freezing at test. Third, electrical stimulation of IL neurons across CS-alone presentations enhances extinction learning (Vidal-Gonzalez et al. ), post-extinction bursting of these neurons correlates with expression of extinction at test (Burgos-Robles et al. ), and testing itself increases IL neuronal activity (Milad and Quirk ; for further evidence on the role of the IL in retrieval of extinction, see Rhodes and Killcross , ).
Summary
The findings described above show that the BLA and IL have distinct roles in the acquisition and retrieval/expression of fear extinction: of these two regions, only the BLA is involved in acquisition of extinction learning, and only the IL is involved in the retrieval/expression of this learning. They additionally show that both regions play a role in the consolidation of fear extinction, but that the processes required for consolidation in each region are different: consolidation of fear extinction in the IL requires both NMDA receptor activation and MAPK signaling, and consolidation of fear extinction in the BLA requires MAPK signaling but not NMDA receptor activation. Together, these findings suggest that CS-alone presentations increase activity in the BLA, which, in the absence of the expected danger, signals the need for IL input to suppress neurotransmission from the BLA to CeA. Hence, the acquisition of extinction requires the BLA, the consolidation of extinction requires communication between the BLA and IL, and finally, the retrieval/expression of extinction requires the IL to maintain suppression of CeA-dependent conditioned defensive reactions.
The role of the BLA in re-extinction of conditioned fear
As noted in the “ Introduction ,” fear responses are typically rapidly re-acquired when the extinguished CS is again paired with a shock US (for review, see Westbrook and Bouton ). This implies that extinction does not erase the original CS-shock association, but rather, produces new learning that opposes or masks the retrieval/expression of the original association. In an elegant series of studies, Rescorla ( ) showed that the learning produced by extinction also survives re-conditioning: specifically, a CS that had been extinguished and re-conditioned continued to exhibit the signature characteristics of extinction, such as spontaneous recovery. Thus, just as extinction does not erase the learning produced by conditioning, re-conditioning does not erase the learning produced by extinction.
Of course, a CS that has been extinguished and re-conditioned can be re-extinguished. In the past decade, research in our laboratory has examined the roles of the BLA and IL in the re - extinction of conditioned fear. As the learning produced by fear extinction is grounded in IL-amygdala projections and survives re-conditioning, we reasoned that re-extinction involves retrieval and strengthening of these projections. Hence, the roles of the BLA and IL in re- extinction of fear responses may differ from their roles in fear extinction. The protocol used in this research is shown in Fig. 1 a. It typically involves four groups of rats. Two groups are exposed to context-shock pairings on day 1 and then to the context alone on day 2 in order to first condition and then extinguish fear of the context. These two groups are then exposed to a repeat of this 2-day cycle across which context conditioned fear is re-conditioned (context-shock pairings on day 3) and then re- extinguished (context alone exposures on day 4). The treatment of the remaining two groups differs from that just described only in that they do not receive context extinction on day 2. Hence, whereas context-alone exposures on day 4 result in re- extinction of context conditioned fear in the first two groups, these same exposures result in extinction of context conditioned fear in the latter two groups. All groups are then tested for the effects of re-extinction or extinction in a final session of context-alone exposure on day 5. Fig. 1 a Experimental design used to investigate learning and relearning extinction. Subjects in groups learning are conditioned twice to fear a particular CS through pairing with a footshock US. The fear is then extinguished before assessing fear to the CS the following day. Subjects in groups relearning are trained to fear a CS; the fear is extinguished and then re-conditioned. The re-conditioned fear is again extinguished and tested the following day. b Left Panel: Rats displayed similar levels of fear responding during stage 4 whether they received extinction training for the first or second time (F < 0.8). Systemic MK-801 significantly suppressed fear responding (F(1, 24) = 15.67; P < 0.05) regardless of whether it was administered before first or second extinction training (F < 0.5). Overall, fear responding significantly declined across first and second extinction training (F(1, 24) = 125.93; P < 0.05). Right panel: Rats treated with vehicle displayed similar low levels of responding at test (stage 5; F < 0.1). These levels of fear were equivalent to those exhibited by rats treated with MK-801 before their second extinction training (F < 0.5). However, rats treated with MK-801 before their first extinction training showed more fear than all other rats (F(1, 24) = 32.50; P < 0.05). Thus, systemic MK-801 impairs learning extinction but spares relearning extinction. c Left panel: Rats displayed similar levels of fear responding during stage 4 whether they received extinction training for the first or second time (F < 0.2). Systemic ifenprodil impaired the loss of fear responding (F(1, 28) = 23.86; P < 0.05) irrespective of whether it was administered before first or second extinction training (F < 1.5). Overall, fear responding significantly declined across first and second extinction (F(1, 28) = 466.36; P < 0.05). Right panel: Rats displayed similar levels of responding at test (stage 5) whether they had received one or two extinction training (F < 0.1). Rats treated with systemic ifenprodil exhibited higher levels of fear than vehicle-treated rats (F(1, 28) = 19.36; P < 0.05), irrespective of the number of extinction training administered (F < 0.1). Thus, systemic ifenprodil impairs learning and relearning extinction
Our first set of studies used this protocol to examine the role of the BLA in extinction and re-extinction. Specifically, immediately prior to the extinction or re-extinction session on day 4, one group in each pair received a BLA infusion of the GABA A agonist, muscimol, to temporarily silence neuronal activity in this region, and the other received a BLA infusion of vehicle only. These studies revealed three major findings. First, in the final drug-free test, rats that had received BLA muscimol infusions prior to their initial extinction on day 4 froze more than did rats in the other three groups, indicating that this extinction had been disrupted. In contrast, those that had received BLA muscimol infusions prior to re-extinction on day 4 froze at the same low level as vehicle-infused controls, indicating that re-extinction was intact (Laurent et al. ). Importantly, the same results were obtained using variants of the basic protocol in which the CS was a discrete auditory stimulus (a white noise or a tone) instead of the context (Laurent and Westbrook ), and when fear was restored via a context shift or the passage of time prior to the critical stage of training (Lingawi et al. ). Thus, unlike initial extinction, re-extinction of conditioned fear can occur independently of neuronal activity in the BLA, and this finding generalizes across stimulus types and manipulations used to restore fear responses prior to re-extinction.
The second major finding from this set of studies was the specificity of the re-extinction effect. For example, a tone (CS 1 ) and light (CS 2 ) was conditioned on day 1. On day 2, half of the rats received extinction to the tone, whereas the other half received extinction to the light. Fear to the extinguished CS was allowed to spontaneously recover for 1 week, after which all of the rats received extinction to the tone. Importantly, half of the rats in each group received this extinction under BLA infusions of muscimol, whereas the other half received saline infusions. Thus, initial or recovered fear to the tone was conducted under BLA inactivation for half of the rats in each group. Rats that received their initial extinction to the tone under BLA inactivation showed heightened levels of fear than vehicle-infused controls on the subsequent drug-free test session, indicating that extinction of one CS (e.g., the tone) had been impaired even though these rats had previously received extinction of the other CS (the light). These findings show that the effects of prior extinction training on the substrates required for current extinction are specific to the stimulus that had, in fact, been previously extinguished and do not generalize to a second stimulus that is undergoing its initial extinction while the target stimulus is being re-extinguished.
Third, consolidation of re-extinction is also unaffected by post-training muscimol infusions into the BLA (Laurent and Westbrook ), providing further evidence that this region is not needed for re-extinction. However, just because the BLA is not required for re-extinction does not mean that it always occurs independently of the BLA. In fact, our laboratory has identified two circumstances under which the BLA is required for re-extinction. The first is when activity in the BLA had been silenced during the initial session of extinction training: i.e., relative to vehicle-infused controls, rats that received BLA muscimol infusions prior to both extinction and then re-extinction exhibited more freezing to the CS during the final test session, indicating that re-extinction had been impaired. This finding was taken to mean that, if the learning that occurred during initial extinction cannot be retrieved and strengthened, re-extinction of a CS requires neuronal activity in the BLA. The second circumstance is when an NMDA receptor antagonist was infused into the BLA prior to the critical training session (on day 4). Specifically, BLA infusion of ifenprodil (selective antagonist of NMDA receptors that contain the NR2B subunit) disrupted the within-session decline in freezing among rats receiving either extinction or re-extinction, and rats that received these infusions froze more on the subsequent drug-free test session than did vehicle-infused controls (Laurent et al. ).
The ifenprodil-induced disruption of re-extinction appears to contradict the findings described above showing that re-extinction survives temporary (muscimol-induced) inactivation of the BLA: i.e., it implies that, within the BLA, re-extinction involves activation of NMDA receptors but not general neuronal activity. In order to resolve this apparent contradiction, we suggested that, when basal neural transmission in the BLA is intact, re-extinction requires the same cellular processes as initial extinction, including activation of NMDA receptors (hence it is disrupted by ifenprodil infusions), but when basal neural transmission is disrupted, re-extinction involves retrieval and strengthening of the prior extinction learning, and hence, occurs independently of the BLA. This description of the results accounts for all of the findings described above. However, it is challenged by the results of one study which showed that a systemic injection of the non-competitive NMDAr antagonist, MK-801, impairs initial extinction but completely spares re-extinction (Langton and Richardson ): i.e., in contrast to the disruption of re-extinction that was observed when ifenprodil was infused directly into the BLA, rats that received an intraperitoneal injection of MK-801 prior to re-extinction froze at the same low level as vehicle-infused controls during the subsequent drug-free test.
The reason for this inconsistency remains unclear but may relate to widespread pharmacological effects of MK-801. To assess this possibility, we recently compared the effects of systemic ifenprodil and MK-801 injections on fear extinction and re-extinction. Systemic ifenprodil impaired the reduction in fear responses across both extinction sessions, as well as long-term retention of the learning that occurred in each session. Systemic MK-801 also impaired the long-term retention of initial extinction; however, in contrast to ifenprodil, it suppressed fear responses when administered before extinction or re-extinction and spared the long-term retention of re-extinction (Fig. 1 c). We took these findings to mean that systemic MK-801 injections disrupt basal levels of activity in the BLA, hence its acute suppressive effect on fear responses in extinction and re-extinction. It seems reasonable, therefore, to conclude that the role of the BLA in re-extinction depends on the levels of basal neural activity in this region: when this activity is intact, relearning extinction involves the same processes required for initial extinction, e.g., NMDA receptor activation in the BLA; but this activity is suppressed, and relearning extinction can occur independently of the BLA.
The role of the IL in (re-)extinction of conditioned fear
We have just described evidence that re-extinction can occur in the absence of neuronal activity in the BLA. To account for this finding, we have proposed that the IL compensates for the lack of activity in the BLA, thereby permitting successful re-extinction. This proposal is based on the established role of the IL in consolidation and retrieval of the learning that occurs during an initial stage of extinction. Findings from our laboratory have consistently supported this role: IL inactivation has no effect on the within-session loss of fear responses across the initial extinction of a CS but impairs the loss of fear responses across its re-extinction, as well as the long-term retention of that re-extinction (Laurent and Westbrook ). Taken together, these various findings imply that, when the BLA is inactivated, re-extinction may be achieved through IL-dependent retrieval of an already-established extinction memory, which is then strengthened across additional presentations of the CS alone.
We recently obtained further evidence in support of this proposal by examining the effect of pharmacologically stimulating the IL during extinction or re-extinction of conditioned fear. In one study, rats were trained to fear a CS in context A. Half of the rats were then extinguished to this CS in context B, while the remaining rats were exposed to context B alone (i.e., these rats did not receive extinction to the CS). Rats were then re-exposed to CS-alone presentations in context A: importantly, those that had been extinguished to the CS in context B exhibited as much fear as those that did not receive extinction, indicating that fear of the CS had been preserved in the non-extinguished rats and was completely renewed in the extinguished rats. Initial or renewed fear to the CS was then extinguished under in context A infusions of the GABA A antagonist, picrotoxin, which was intended to stimulate the IL. Picrotoxin decreased freezing responses during both first (initial fear) and second (renewed fear) extinction training. However, a test conducted the following day in context A revealed that picrotoxin had no effect on the retention of extinction that had been learned for the first time, but facilitated the retention of extinction that had been learned for the second time: i.e., the extinction of renewed fear responses (Lingawi et al. ). This facilitative effect of IL picrotoxin infusions has also been observed in rats that relearn extinction following re-conditioning (Lingawi et al. ) and shown to be specific to the CS undergoing re-extinction. Specifically, IL picrotoxin infusions had no effect when a target CS is subject to its first extinction after a different CS had been previously extinguished (Lingawi et al. ). These results rule-out a range of simple explanations for the key finding, including non-specific effects of picrotoxin. Instead, they suggest that IL stimulation can enhance the retrieval and strengthening of an already established extinction memory, thereby facilitating short-term extinction of fear responses and long-term retention of the extinction memory.
In additional studies, we examined the generality of the role of the IL in retrieving and strengthening a past memory of CS-alone exposures (Lingawi et al. , ). This work specifically showed that the history of CS-alone exposures prior to its fear conditioning critically determines whether or not its first fear extinction can be facilitated by IL infusions of picrotoxin. We considered two types of training history. The first was simple pre-exposure to the CS. Relative to rats for which the CS was novel at the time of its conditioning, those for which the CS had been familiarized through pre-exposure exhibited evidence for facilitated extinction: i.e., among these rats, the IL picrotoxin infusions resulted in a more rapid loss of freezing to the CS across its extinction, and this low level of freezing persisted in the final drug-free test. The second type of training involved first pairing the target CS with food, and then extinguishing the conditioned appetitive responses (approach to magazine) via CS-alone presentations. On days 1–6, half of the rats learned that one target CS, CS 1 , predicts a food outcome whereas the remaining rats learned that another CS, CS 2 , predicts the food outcome. On day 7, all rats were repeatedly presented with their respective CS in the absence of food. Thus, CS 1 was appetitively extinguished in half of the rats and CS 2 in the other half (thereby equating exposure to food among the different groups). On day 8, all rats were fear conditioned to CS 1 and that fear was extinguished on day 4. This first fear extinction training to CS 1 was conducted under pharmacological stimulation of the IL or vehicle. A test conducted the following day assessed fear to CS 1. Rats that had been appetitively trained and extinguished with CS 2 exhibited similar fear whether they had received IL stimulation or not, confirming that the stimulation fails to facilitate learning extinction. By contrast, rats that had been appetitively trained and extinguished with CS 1 showed less fear when they had received IL stimulation during their first fear extinction training (Lingawi et al. ), indicating facilitation of long-term extinction. These findings suggest that the IL does not uniquely store the memory of fear extinction but is more generally involved in storing the memory of CS-alone exposures, regardless of how those exposures are administered (in pre-exposure or appetitive extinction). Hence, following CS pre-exposure or appetitive extinction, a memory of the CS-alone exposures is stored in the IL, survives the effects of fear conditioning to the CS, and permits facilitated fear extinction upon stimulation of the IL.
Summary, conclusions, and implications
This paper reviewed the roles of the BLA and IL in extinction and re-extinction of conditioned fear; a summary of these roles is provided in Table 1 . The first part summarized the roles of these brain regions in extinction of conditioned fear: the acquisition of fear extinction requires neuronal activity in the BLA, and not the IL; the consolidation of fear extinction requires neuronal activity in both regions; and the retrieval of fear extinction requires activity in the IL, and not the BLA. The second part described evidence showing that the BLA is not necessary for re-extinction, regardless of the type of fear that is re-extinguished (re-conditioned, renewed, or spontaneously recovered). It additionally covered evidence that the effects of prior extinction training on the substrates required for current extinction are specific to a previously extinguished CS, rather than to a prior history of extinction. The third part highlighted the critical role of the IL in the acquisition of re-extinction, and therefore, its dissociable roles in extinction and re-extinction. These dissociable roles were taken to mean that re-extinction involves retrieval and strengthening of the memory formed during the prior extinction. Hence, re-extinction requires neuronal activity in the IL to retrieve the extinction memory but can occur independently of activity in the BLA, which is not required for retrieval of the extinction memory. Table 1 Summary of the roles of basal activity and NMDAr in the BLA and IL in the acquisition and consolidation of extinction and re-extinction. ✓ denotes a required role, ✗ denotes not required Extinction Re-extinction Acquisition Consolidation Acquisition Consolidation BLA Activity ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ NMDAr ✓ ✗ ✓ 1 ✗ IL Activity ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ NMDAr ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Infusions specifically targeting NMDAr in the BLA impair acquisition of re-extinction despite the fact that such learning is spared by muscimol infusions. This is likely due to compensatory mechanisms in other regions (such as IL) that are recruited when basal transmission in the BLA is disrupted
The final part of the paper reviewed a recent study from our laboratory which examined the generality of the IL role in retrieving and strengthening a past memory of CS-alone exposures (Lingawi et al. ). This study showed that, when fear conditioning of a target CS was preceded by an explicit stage of CS pre-exposure (sufficient to generate latent inhibition) or another form of extinction (appetitive extinction), the first extinction of fear to that CS was facilitated by pharmacological stimulation of the IL. These results were taken to imply that the IL is generally involved in representing the learning that occurs during CS-alone exposures, regardless of whether those exposures occur during pre-exposure, fear extinction or appetitive extinction, and that this learning survives fear conditioning of the CS to influence its fear extinction. One possible explanation for this role of the IL is that it represents the absence of an expected event, and hence, is the site of plasticity for CS-no event (Hall and Rodriguez ) or CS-no US associations (Bouton ) that interfere with conditioned responding. Alternatively, the IL may be required for the inhibition of conditioned or unconditioned reactions to a target CS, which is a feature of both extinction and CS pre-exposure protocols. Future work will seek to distinguish between these alternative explanations of IL function, further examine the conditions under which CS-alone exposures engage the IL, and identify the cellular processes through which the memory of these CS-alone exposures is retrieved and strengthened in the IL.
Our very last comment concerns the significance of the research on extinction and re-extinction to the challenge of successfully treating anxiety disorders such as PTSD. As noted, extinction is an animal model for cue exposure therapy, which remains the most efficacious treatment for these disorders. It involves the patient confronting trauma-related cues in the absence of any overt danger. One aim is to reduce, or inhibit, the ability of these cues to elicit the fear and associated avoidance that impair the quality of the patient’s life. This aim is frequently achieved. A recent meta-analysis of over 3000 studies revealed that CBT is more effective than placebo treatment in reducing anxiety disorder symptoms and produces benefits to the patients’ quality of life beyond the symptoms of the disorder, which persisted at follow-up (Carpenter et al. ). Despite these benefits, at least two challenges remain. First, compliance is an issue. Exposure therapy is itself a highly aversive experience where patients confront the source of their fear, an experience that many subsequently avoid by dropping out of therapy. In fact, CBT yields higher drop-out rates than placebo treatment (24% compared to 17%); drop-out rates for those suffering from PTSD and treated with CBT have been shown to be as high at 29% (Carpenter et al. ). Second, anxiety disorders are chronically relapsing conditions. Studies have found 30–48% of patients remained symptomatic in 1 year follow-ups (Durham et al. ; Gloaguen et al. ). Thus, multiple sessions are required for patients to learn to control their fear, and patients who have learned this control are nevertheless still prone to relapse, requiring additional therapy. Our work on re-extinction provides some suggestions about the conditions under which additional therapy should be administered. For instance, we have reproduced the results obtained with BLA inactivation by employing systemic injection of the benzodiazepine agent midazolam. Specifically, we found that midazolam impairs extinction but it spares and even facilitates re-extinction (Hart et al. ). These findings suggest that a benzodiazepine treatment would be detrimental when given in conjunction with initial exposure therapy. However, in situations where relapse occurs, the efficacy of additional exposure therapy should be improved by benzodiazepines. Not only could it accelerate the impact of such therapy, it should also increase compliance, as benzodiazepines such as midazolam are well known to reduce fear (Helmstetter ; Harris and Westbrook ). These hypotheses provide potential avenues for future studies that will inform improvements in treatment approaches for these conditions.