Introduction
Fear and anxiety trigger evolutionary imprinted defensive behaviors that are essential for adaptation and survival in potentially dangerous situations. However, excessive activation of underlying processes may cause maladaptive fear or/and anxiety and lead to psychiatric diseases such as depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD; Desmedt et al. ) that are significant burden to today’s modern societies. Although these two emotional states are characterized by overlapping physiological, hormonal, autonomic, and behavioral symptoms, they also have several distinct features (Ledoux ; Davis et al. ; Anderson and Adolphs ). Hence, fear is considered an adaptive response to an actual physical or/and psychological aversive event with a potential danger that is short-lived as it decays once the threat is abolished. By contrast, anxiety is a future-based emotional state with sustained heightened awareness that is triggered by incidental, potential, and anticipated danger (Grupe and Nitschke ). Despite this distinction, the neural circuits involved in mediation of fearful stimuli vs. anxiogenic stimuli seem to show great overlap (See (Tovote et al. ) for an excellent review) suggesting a potential functional and/or anatomical synergy. The degree of this interaction might indeed be critical for the pathogenicity of specific fear memories. Thus, identification and characterization of intermediaries that are involved in processing of learned fear vs. innate anxiety is of high importance.
In rodents, these two emotional states can be studied with several experimental paradigms. Innate “unlearned” anxiety is often studied with experimental procedures that are based on changes in exploratory and avoidance behavior, such as the light/dark test, the elevated plus maze or open field test (Tovote et al. ). On the other hand, one of the most used experimental models to study “learned fear” is Pavlovian fear conditioning which can be achieved in a single training session and results in robust and long lasting fear memory expressed as freezing behavior. A major advantage of this paradigm is that it permits discrimination of neuronal processes underlying acquisition, consolidation, and retrieval of emotional memories (Baldi and Bucherelli ; Ledoux ; Maren et al. ; Maren and Quirk ). The initial “acquisition” phase involves explicit presentation of a previously neutral stimulus referred to as conditioned stimuli (CS) together with an aversive unconditional stimulus (US: a mild electric foot shock) that will trigger an immediate formation of an associative memory between the CS and US. Here, the CS can be a specific auditory tone (auditory fear conditioning) and/or context (contextual fear conditioning) that determines the significance of contextual information in anticipation of the US. Along this line, several contextual fear conditioning protocols exist, during which either the CS is explicitly paired (background fear conditioning) or unpaired (foreground fear conditioning) with the US or no CS is presented (Phelps ; Raza et al. ). The acquisition phase is followed by a phase called “consolidation” during which the labile fear memory trace is converted into a more stable state involving various molecular/cellular and system-level adaptations among a brain-wide network (Bourtchuladze et al. ; McGaugh ; Nader et al. ; Abel and Lattal ; Frankland and Bontempi ). Following memory retention over even long periods of time, fear memory in the “retrieval” phase” can be recalled upon re-exposure to the auditory tone or conditioning context and elicit a conditioned fear response (CFR). Accumulating evidence suggests that reactivation of distinct cell populations in brain-wide circuits that were specifically activated during encoding of an event is required to trigger the retrieval of the memory (Reijmers et al. ; Han et al. ; Garner et al. ; Liu et al. ; Kim et al. ; Ramirez et al. ). Thus, it is important to understand that even consolidated fear memories are very dynamic and undergo modification and updating upon retrieval via modification of already formed fear engrams or emergence of a new competing set of engram cells (Herry et al. ; An et al. ; Knapska et al. ; Senn et al. ). Two extreme cases of this are fear memory “reconsolidation” and “extinction,” in which the retrieved memory is either stabilized or updated upon retrieval, respectively (Baldi and Bucherelli ). Which of these processes will dominate over the other depends on the features of the re-exposure to the CS. For instance, a short retrieval episode which involves reactivation of the original fear memory and integration of new aspects into the initial fear memory trace is more likely to prompt a reconsolidation process conserving the fear response (Nader et al. ; Dudai ; Alberini ; Tronson and Taylor ; Alberini and Ledoux ). By contrast, upon frequent repetition of memory retrieval in the absence of the US a new inhibitory memory is formed that competes with the original fear memory trace and thus leads to a gradual reduction in the CFR (Myers and Davis ; Quirk and Mueller ). Importantly, such extinction is highly context-dependent and does not reflect an erasure of the original fear memory, which is evident by the fact that extinguished fear memory can re-arise simply by the passing of time (“spontaneous recovery”), with the presentation of the CS in a novel context (“renewal”) or presentation of the US in the absence of CS (“reinstatement”; (Myers and Davis ; Quirk and Mueller ). These aspects are also evident by often noticed context-dependent relapse of fear upon clinical intervention studies using exposure therapy, a generally used extinction-like protocol for treatment of anxiety disorders in humans (Bouton ; Hermans et al. ; Craske et al. ).
Several main hub regions (referred to as “limbic brain regions”)—including the hippocampus, amygdala, and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC)—play distinct roles across both learned fear and innate anxiety states. The hippocampus is critical for both cognitive functions (Buzsáki and Moser ) and the control of affective behaviors (Baldi and Bucherelli ; Dejean et al. ; Maren and Holmes ). It also provides relevant contextual processing in ambiguous potentially-aversive situations including fear extinction learning (Maren and Holt ; Maren et al. ). Disturbance of this function and inappropriate contextualization are thought to lead to maladaptive behavior and contribute to psychopathologies including PTSD (Maren et al. ; Jin and Maren ). Of note, in both rodent and human studies, impaired fear extinction and exaggerated anxiety have been identified as prominent features of PTSD (VanElzakker et al. ; Chen et al. ; Yu et al. ; Li et al. ; Soliman et al. ; Zeitlin et al. ; Olsen et al. ). Thus, PTSD patients suffer from a reduced ability to suppress fear even during presentation of a cue that explicitly signals safety (Jovanovic et al. ). These findings suggest that heightened anxiety can interfere with extinction processes even under relatively safe circumstances when a specific cue no longer predicts threat. Thus, the degree of overlap between anxiety network and fear network, and their (mal)-functional interplay during extinction may determine pathology.
At the same time, the hippocampus has been identified as a key structure for the emergence of distinct neural network oscillations in the theta, gamma and high frequency ranges. These network activity patterns mediate neural communication and plasticity within and across distinct brain regions via providing temporal windows during which engaged neurons can undergo particular pre- or post-synaptic modifications (Bastos et al. ; Fell and Axmacher ; Fries ). They represent distinct functional configurations of a network that occur not only during specific stages of fear memory formation but also during low and high anxiety states. These brain-state-dependent network oscillations in the hippocampus and their interaction with the amygdala and mPFC mediate information processing during these states. Thus, we argue that they are excellent candidates for mediating the interplay between learned fear and innate anxiety potentially providing proxies for fear extinction deficits and their relation to psychopathology . We propose that environmental or genetic factors that lead to malfunction of oscillatory communication in this brain-wide distributed network during evaluation of anxiogenic properties of an event can elicit maladaptive behavior and abnormal (e.g., exaggerated) memory formation. The goal of this review is to synthesize the current knowledge on engagement of hippocampal network oscillations and their coordination with other limbic structures in mediation of fear and/or anxiety and search for common oscillatory biomarkers for fear memory persistence.
Overview of network oscillations in the hippocampal circuitry
Network oscillations are periodic voltage deflections, referred to as local field potentials (LFP), that represent the cumulative transmembrane currents and generated by a population of neurons in the vicinity of an extracellularly placed electrode. Thus, they provide information about the functional state of neuronal networks and their communication with each other (Buzsáki et al. ; Einevoll et al. ). Due to its well-separated layers and distinct structure, the hippocampus can generate large amplitude LFP patterns with spatially distinct sinks and sources (Buzsáki et al. ). Therefore, it is an excellent candidate for investigating basic mechanisms behind generation of network oscillations with distinct frequency ranges such as theta (4–10 Hz), gamma (30–100 Hz) and fast ripple oscillations (120–300 Hz; (Buzsáki and Draguhn )). In the following section, we will briefly introduce generation of these oscillation types and their generic mnemonic functions during two distinct LFP network states in the hippocampus, i.e., sharp-wave ripples (SW-R) and nested theta-gamma oscillations, before discussing their involvement in information processing that are relevant to distinct anxiety states.
Hippocampal sharp wave-ripples (SW-R) and their interaction with cortical delta oscillations mediate off-line memory consolidation
Hippocampal SW-R are LFP transients occurring most frequently (0.01 to 2 Hz) during slow-wave sleep (SWS) but also during quiet awake states (Buzsáki et al. ; Ylinen et al. ); See (Buzsáki ) for a comprehensive review). One prominent feature of these events is the co-occurrence of superimposed fast oscillations termed “ripples” (~ 150–250 Hz) in the CA1 pyramidal layer that are generated by synchronization of interneuronal networks and triggered by concerted excitation of pyramidal cells in the CA3 subregion (Buzsaki ; Ylinen et al. ; Csicsvari et al. ). Several lines of evidence from studies using cell-type specific optogenetic manipulations suggest that both feedback inhibition and reciprocal inhibition (Fig. 1 a–b), mainly mediated by parvalbumin-positive (PV+) interneurons, are required for generation of ripple oscillations (Stark et al. ; Schlingloff et al. ). Fig. 1 Two distinct local field potential (LFP) patterns in the hippocampal circuit. a LFP trace of an individual hippocampal sharp wave-ripple (SW-R, upper trace) and band-pass filtered ripples (100–300 Hz, lower trace, marked with dashed lines) from CA1 pyramidal cell layer of rodent hippocampus during slow wave sleep (SWS). b A circuit model for generation of ripples. Tonic excitatory input drives local pyramidal neurons (P) that activates reciprocally-connected local interneurons (IN). The IN network paces the activity of already-excited P via reciprocal inhibition. This interaction gives rise to LFP ripple pattern. c LFP trace of nested theta-gamma oscillations from CA1 pyramidal cell layer of rodent hippocampus recorded during REM sleep (filtered theta oscillations (4–10 Hz) in gray tone). An episode with prominent gamma oscillations (30–80 Hz) is highlighted within the box. d Two circuit models for generation of gamma oscillations. IN-G (gamma) model is based on activation of reciprocally-connected IN that pace the activity of each other (reciprocal inhibition) and local P giving rise to gamma band LFP patterns. P-IN-G model is based on based on activation of local IN by local P and, in turn, suppression of local P activity by feedback inhibition. These interactions occur in a cyclic manner that give rise to gamma oscillations. ( a and c , unpublished data of G. Caliskan; b , based on Stark et al. ; d , based on Wang and Buzsáki ; Whittington et al. ; Börgers and Kopell ; de Almeida et al. ; Börgers and Walker ; Schlingloff et al. )
During SWS, co-occurrence of SW-R with cortical delta oscillations (0.5–4 Hz) has been reported (Sirota et al. ; Battaglia et al. ; Isomura et al. ). These slow oscillations consist of prominent up- and downstates that are associated with periodic depolarisation and hyperpolarisation of cortical cells, respectively (Contreras and Steriade ; Neske ). On the other hand, in the hippocampus, SW-R co-occur together with a hippocampal LFP pattern without clear up- and downstates termed as large irregular activity (LIA, 2–4 Hz; (Vanderwolf ; Jarosiewicz et al. ; Wolansky et al. ; Bazelot et al. )).
Converging evidence indicates that the cell assemblies and their temporal activation patterns acquired during a period of learning are reactivated in faster timescale during SW-R events, thereby supporting Hebbian plasticity and offline memory consolidation (Wilson and McNaughton ; King et al. ; Kudrimoti et al. ; Mizunuma et al. ; Sadowski et al. ). Similar to hippocampal SW-R, in rodents, the upstates are associated with reactivation of cortical cell assemblies that are activated during a learning event in a temporally compressed manner (Euston et al. ). This particular long-range hippocampal-to-cortical communication and associated cellular reactivation are proposed to mediate a progressive relocation of hippocampus-dependent memories towards cortical circuits. This “systems memory consolidation” (Frankland and Bontempi ; Kitamura et al. ; Xia et al. ) happens most effectively during SWS and promotes long-term memory storage (Diekelmann and Born , ; Born and Wilhelm ). In support, off-line targeted interruption of SW-R in the dorsal hippocampus (DH) during post learning sleep (~ 1 h) impairs spatial memory (Girardeau et al. ). Furthermore, rodents with augmented coupling between hippocampal SW-R and cortical delta oscillations perform better in a spatial object recognition task (Maingret et al. ).
Theta oscillations and co-occurring gamma oscillations mediate both online memory encoding and off-line memory consolidation
During exploration and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, two distinct hippocampal LFP patterns with different frequency ranges co-occur: theta oscillations (4–10 Hz) and gamma oscillation (30–100 Hz; Fig. 1 .; (Jouvet ; Vanderwolf ; Bragin et al. ; Kudrimoti et al. ; Csicsvari et al. ; Fries et al. ; Colgin et al. ; Buzsáki and Wang ; Nikolić et al. )). A critical factor that regulates the emergence of these hippocampal network states in vivo is the cholinergic tonus (Buzsáki ; Parikh et al. ; Zhang et al. ). While low cholinergic tonus is present during rest/SWS, it significantly increases during wakefulness/REM (Kametani and Kawamura ; Marrosu et al. ). Accordingly, theta oscillations (formerly referred to as rhythmical slow wave activity—RSA; Vanderwolf ) are largely mediated by the inputs to the hippocampus that are provided by medial septum-diagonal band of Broca (MS-DBB; Buzsáki ; Petsche et al. ). This long-range septal projection consists of heterogeneous set of cell types including cholinergic, GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons (Hajszan et al. ; Huh et al. ; Unal et al. ). Accumulating evidence suggests that the generation and maintenance of hippocampal theta activity is dependent on interplay between GABAergic and cholinergic components of this projection, with the former serving as rhythm generators and the latter controlling the strength of hippocampal theta activity (Kramis et al. ; Lee et al. ; Dannenberg et al. ; Boyce et al. ; Gangadharan et al. ; Vandecasteele et al. ).
Of note, cholinergic input is also critical for regulation of gamma oscillations (30–100 Hz) that appear superimposed to theta oscillations (Bragin et al. ; Buzsáki and Wang ; Colgin et al. ; Csicsvari et al. ; Fries et al. ; Nikolić et al. ). This is evident in the replacement of spontaneous SW-R through gamma oscillations upon pharmacological activation of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in hippocampal slice preparations (Fisahn et al. ; Çalışkan et al. ) and after optogenetic stimulation of septo-hippocampal cholinergic projections in vivo (Vandecasteele et al. ). Both computational and experimental analyses suggest that the generation of hippocampal gamma oscillations further depends on a precise inhibition mediated by local hippocampal interneurons. Two fundamental models (Fig. 1 c–d) for the genesis of gamma oscillations are generally accepted in the scientific community (Whittington et al. ; Buzsáki and Wang ; Viriyopase et al. ). The first one is based on exclusive interneuron-interneuron interactions (ING: Interneuron Network Gamma). Here, when an adequate number of reciprocally-connected interneurons is activated by an external excitatory input, they periodically pace the activity of each other for several cycles due to their high probability of firing and synaptic kinetics, thus resulting in coherent gamma band LFP patterns (Wang and Buzsáki ; Whittington et al. ). The second model is based on periodic interplay between local pyramidal cells and interneurons (Pyramidal-ING: PING). This model proposes that local pyramidal neurons provide excitation of interneurons, activity of which successively suppresses pyramidal cell activity. These interactions occur in cyclic manner resulting in generation of gamma range oscillations (Börgers and Kopell ; de Almeida et al. ; Börgers and Walker ; Schlingloff et al. ). A large body of evidence has meanwhile implicated PV+ interneurons in the generation of gamma oscillations (Buzsáki et al. ; Bragin et al. ; Csicsvari et al. ; Hasenstaub et al. ; Mann et al. ; Hájos and Paulsen ; Cardin et al. ; Sohal et al. ; Dilgen et al. ; Siegle et al. ; Iaccarino et al. ).
Theta synchronization serves as a common oscillatory mechanism for the communication between brain regions during the acquisition and consolidation of memories (Headley and Paré ; Seidenbecher et al. ; Siapas et al. ; Fell and Axmacher ). Increases in theta oscillations and their synchrony with cortical and subcortical areas have been recorded in hippocampal circuits during both spatial and non-spatial behavioral tasks, as well as during REM sleep (Seidenbecher et al. ; Siapas et al. ; Popa et al. ; Fell and Axmacher ; Headley and Paré ). By contrast, gamma oscillations appear to be more involved in cognitive and sensory processes that include sustainment of working memory, attentional selection and perception (Fell et al. ; Fries et al. ; Fries et al. ; Gray et al. ; Montgomery and Buzsáki ), as well as various affective behaviors (See (Headley and Paré ) for a comprehensive review). Involvement of gamma band activity in these diverging functions may suggest that they represent a primary mode of ensemble activity. In fact, gamma phase synchronization can facilitate synchronous activation of two areas and their inputs to a shared target (coincidence detection). Thus, gamma rhythms can provide common excitable periods for co-activation of pre- and post-synaptic neurons and thereby support spike time-dependent plasticity (STDP; (Fell and Axmacher ). According to the “gamma-binding hypothesis,” activation of memory-encoding neuronal ensembles in distinct brain regions is concerted during gamma-range episodes (Buzsáki and Wang ; Colgin et al. ; Fries et al. ). However, the strength and frequency of such coordinated gamma activity is also strongly modulated by the phase of the co-appearing theta oscillations (Fries et al. ; Colgin et al. ; Buzsáki and Wang ). Thus, cross-frequency coupling between theta and gamma oscillations is a fundamental mechanism for effective transmission of information in a functional brain-wide network (Colgin et al. ; Buzsáki and Wang ).
Cumulatively, distinct network states in the hippocampus are represented by specific oscillatory LFP patterns in a behavioral-state dependent manner. These network oscillation types can co-exist and mediate information flow within a functional brain-wide network. It is conceivable that distortion of network oscillations and underlying neuronal activity patterns may trigger maladaptive changes in this functional network and can lead to dysfunctional behavior.
Oscillatory substrates of anxiety: interaction with fear and extinction processes
In the brain-wide anxiety circuit, the ventral hippocampus (VH) together with the mPFC relays sensory and contextual information to the basolateral amygdala (BLA), which in turn triggers downstream areas such as the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) or central amygdala (CeA) for the expression of anxiety-related behaviors (Adhikari ). At the same time, distinct local circuits in the hippocampus, amygdala and mPFC are also central elements for mediation of fear and extinction memories. These local circuits extensively interact with each other via long-range projections mediating distinct stages of “learned” fear, including fear memory reconsolidation and extinction. It appears that distinct set of cell populations and their projections have diverging effects on fear- and anxiety-related behavior. However, a detailed review of neuronal circuits of fear and anxiety is out of the scope of the current review and we refer the reader to recent excellent reviews (Davis et al. ; Tovote et al. ).
A distinctive feature of innate anxiety that separates it from learned fear is the high degree of uncertainty, associated with sustained hypervigilance and exaggerated expectation of the threat (Grupe and Nitschke ). Despite this discrepancy, these two phenomena share similar oscillatory responses triggered by overlapping circuitry including the VH, amygdala and mPFC. In this section, we will recapitulate those studies that investigated oscillatory changes in the hippocampus-amygdala-mPFC network during high and low anxiety states, triggered by simulating diffusely dangerous situations like exposed/open areas or bright lights, in search for their potential role in fear extinction, thus, persistence of fear memories (Crawley ; Pellow et al. ; Sylvers et al. ).
Increased theta and gamma oscillations within the hippocampus as a biomarker for heightened anxiety and impaired fear extinction
Accumulating evidence suggests that the hippocampus shows an anatomical and functional specification along its dorso-ventral axis (Fanselow and Dong ). In accordance with this anatomical segregation, the dorsal hippocampus (DH), corresponding to posterior hippocampus in humans, is mainly engaged in cognition and spatial processing, whereas the ventral hippocampus (VH), corresponding to anterior hippocampus in humans, is indispensable for stress adaptation, processing of memories with emotional salience and anxiety (Kjelstrup et al. ; Fanselow and Dong ; Buzsáki and Moser ; Strange et al. ). In agreement with this functional separation, theta oscillations in the VH seem to have less spatial modulation in comparison to the theta oscillations in the DH (Patel et al. ; Royer et al. ) and exposure to anxiogenic environment increases the theta power specifically in the VH but not in the DH (Adhikari et al. ; Jacinto et al. ). Interestingly, a genetic mouse model with exaggerated anxiety (Gordon et al. ) displays augmented dorsal hippocampal theta power during exposure to elevated plus maze regardless of the location and speed, highlighting the overlooked involvement of hippocampal theta oscillations in “unlearned” anxiety-like behavior (Korotkova et al. ).
Interestingly, hippocampal gamma power appears to be modulated more strongly by theta oscillations—i.e., with increased theta/gamma coupling—when the anxiogenic properties of the task increase (Khemka et al. ). Studies with patients suffering from PTSD show increased inter-network synchronization in the gamma (30–80 Hz) and high-gamma range (80–150 Hz) compared to controls (Dunkley et al. ). Thus, PTSD patients appear to be hypersynchronous in brain rhythms that are posited to be active in formation and retrieval of autobiographical memories (Canolty et al. ). In accordance, systematic analysis of mouse inbred strains with previously reported anxious and impaired extinction phenotype in our lab indicates enhanced gamma oscillations in slice preparations of the VH (G. Caliskan, unpublished observations). We further observed a reduction in kainate-induced gamma oscillation power in the VH ex vivo after fear memory re-consolidation, paralleled by decreased anxiety-related behavior in elevated plus maze (Albrecht et al. ). Of note, several stress-responsive neuromodulators are released in the periphery and central nervous system during high arousal states such as anxiety (Joëls and Baram ). Of those, both corticosterone and corticotropin-releasing factors appear to enhance cholinergic gamma oscillations in the VH in vitro (Çalışkan et al. ) while different monoamines (serotonin, dopamine, noradrenalin) appear to reduce their power (Wójtowicz et al. ).
Together, it is evident that sustained augmentation of theta and/or gamma oscillations within the hippocampus might predispose individuals to develop psychiatric disorders associated with aberrant memory formation such as PTSD.
Augmented theta synchrony between the VH and mPFC during high anxiety states and expression of learned fear
It is reasonable that the hippocampus mediates the anxiety states in concert with other limbic regions. Thus, the DH is reciprocally connected with brain regions involved in cognitive processing and spatial navigation including the perirhinal, entorhinal, retrosplenial, cingulate, and orbital cortices. On the other hand, VH is tightly interconnected with limbic structures that regulate emotional behavior such as the amygdala, hypothalamus and nucleus accumbens, and cortical areas such as prelimbic (PL) and infralimbic (IL) cortex of mPFC (Van Groen and Wyss ; Naber and Witter ; Pikkarainen et al. ; Prasad and Chudasama ; Hübner et al. ; Strange et al. ; Varela et al. ). One seminal study (Adhikari et al. ) recorded LFP in vivo from VH, DH, and mPFC to dissect the potential differential involvement of DH and VH in anxiety-like behavior. As expected from available anatomical evidence, theta synchronization was much stronger between VH-mPFC pairs than DH-mPFC pairs. Exposing animals to an elevated plus maze or open field specifically enhanced VH-mPFC theta coherence and their theta power in both regions in comparison to those recorded in a familiar area. In a follow-up study, the authors describe differential firing of mPFC cells in closed and open arms of elevated plus maze with less and more anxiogenic features, respectively (Adhikari et al. ). These task-specific neurons were tightly locked to the theta oscillations in the VH, but not in the DH. In a recent study, optogenetic perturbation of the direct VH-mPFC pathway exerted anxiolytic effects in both elevated plus maze and open field test (Padilla-Coreano et al. ). This was associated with disrupted task-related firing of mPFC neurons and their synchrony to the theta oscillations in the VH (Padilla-Coreano et al. ). Similar to task-related firing of mPFC neurons, anxiety-related firing in the open arms of an elevated plus maze was also reported for those ventral CA1 neurons that project to mPFC (Ciocchi et al. ). Bilateral optogenetic silencing of the direct VH input reverses these effects mimicking low anxiety states (Padilla-Coreano et al. ). Together, these observations indicate the importance of direct VH input to mPFC in coordination of local cellular ensembles in the mPFC that encode aversive and non-aversive features of the context.
Similar to expression of innate anxiety, elevated theta synchrony between the VH (but also the DH) and mPFC is evident during expression of learned fear (Lesting et al. ; Likhtik et al. ; Stujenske et al. ). This synchrony gradually decreases during extinction learning and re-emerges upon recall of extinction memory in the DH-IL and LA-IL networks but not in the DH-LA network (See section 3.3. and 3.4; Lesting et al. ). The authors provide evidence for unidirectional influence of theta oscillations and associated unit activity in the IL cortex preceding the dorsal hippocampal theta oscillations during low fear states and low freezing (Lesting et al. ). These observations are in line with the well-acknowledged role of IL-cortex in fear suppression upon successful consolidation of fear extinction memory.
One intriguing question is how innate anxiety vs. learned fear circuitry in the mPFC is differentially modulated by VH inputs. There seems to be a functional separation in the ventral (IL) and dorsal (PL) parts of mPFC in terms of their anxiolytic effects and their time-dependent role in fear extinction (Etkin et al. ; Adhikari et al. ). Several lines of evidence indicate that the VH projections into mPFC substructures, PL and IL cortex, are necessary for contextual regulation of fear extinction (Sotres-Bayon et al. ; Marek et al. ). Both the VH-PL and VH-IL pathways seem to use a feed-forward inhibitory circuit, possibly via PV+ interneurons (Marek et al. ), resulting in suppression of principal neuron activity in these target regions (Sotres-Bayon et al. ; Marek et al. ). It remains to be determined however whether there are fear- and extinction-encoding neurons in the hippocampus projecting specifically to either IL and PL cortices, similar to what has been reported for amygdala-mPFC pathways (Tronson et al. ; Senn et al. ). Ultimately, these observations call for further characterization of theta synchronization in VH-mPFC pathways via cell-type and projection-specific manipulations to disentangle their specific roles in contextual regulation of extinction and innate anxiety.
Another striking observation is the involvement of DH-mPFC theta synchronization during expression and extinction of learned fear as opposed to the involvement of VH-mPFC theta synchronization during expression of innate anxiety. It is apparent that expression and extinction of learned fear requires integration of spatial information to guide the appropriate behavioral output. This is mostly achieved by DH circuits while expression of “unlearned” innate anxiety is mediated by theta synchronization between VH and mPFC (Kjelstrup et al. ; Fanselow and Dong ; Buzsáki and Moser ; Strange et al. ). In fact, human studies provide evidence for increased functional connectivity of anterior hippocampus, corresponding to VH in rodents, with mPFC in comparison to the posterior hippocampus, corresponding to DH in rodents, during threat evaluation (Satpute et al. ).
Increased theta synchrony between the VH and BLA during expression of both heightened innate anxiety and learned fear
Both electrophysiological and anatomical evidence suggest that amygdalar substructures such as the BLA share monosynaptic reciprocal projections with the VH (Herry et al. ; Knapska et al. ; Felix-Ortiz et al. ; Xu et al. ). Theta coupling between the BLA and VH has been repeatedly demonstrated during expression of innate anxiety (Jacinto et al. , ; Likhtik et al. ; Stujenske et al. ). It is very likely that BLA inputs to the VH provide information about negative valence of stimuli and situations. In support, BLA-VH projection has been shown to drive behaviors of innate negative valence evident by either anxiogenic or anxiolytic effects of optogenetic activation or silencing of this pathway, respectively (Felix-Ortiz et al. ). In accordance, theta power increases in both structures during avoidance behavior in an elevated plus maze (Jacinto et al. ). This is also evident by a reduction in BLA-VH theta coherence as the anxiogenic features of an event decreases with familiarization, also referred to as habituation (Jacinto et al. ). Chronic stress appears to augment theta oscillations in both structures when an animal is exposed to the open arms of an elevated plus maze and leads to sustained theta synchronization in the BLA-VH pathway even after familiarization (Jacinto et al. , ). These observations indicate that VH-BLA theta synchronization plays a key role in processing anxiogenic features of an experience.
Similar to processing of “unlearned” innate anxiety, converging evidence suggests that heightened amygdalar influence on the hippocampus augments encoding of emotionally salient memories via enhancing perception and attention (Davis and Whalen ; Phelps ). This is also evident by the emergence, in both rodents and humans, of synchronized theta and/or gamma oscillations in the amygdalar and hippocampal circuits during acquisition and retrieval of emotionally salient memories (Seidenbecher et al. ; Likhtik et al. ; Stujenske et al. ; Zheng et al. ). The first evidence for such oscillatory coupling demonstrates an augmented correlation at low theta (~ 4–5 Hz) level between the dorsal CA1 and LA during in fear memory retrieval upon presentation of a fear-conditioned stimulus (Seidenbecher et al. ). This strong CA1-LA theta synchronization appears to depend on consolidation as it is prominent during retrieval of both contextual and cued memories 24 h after fear acquisition (Seidenbecher et al. ; Pape et al. ; Narayanan et al. ; Bergado-Acosta et al. ; Albrecht et al. ; Lesting et al. ) but not after 2 h (Pape et al. ; Narayanan et al. ). As expected, extinction learning reduces the theta synchronization between these structures suggesting their involvement in reactivation of original fear memories (Lesting et al. ). Furthermore, in rodents, theta-gamma and gamma-gamma coupling arise between the VH and BLA during presentation of conditioned aversive stimuli (CS+) in comparison to neutral stimuli (CS−) (Stujenske et al. ).
Together, augmented theta synchronization between the hippocampus and amygdala appears to signal higher anxiety states. Thus, it is conceivable that heightened anxiety might increase theta communication in this pathway and interfere with the extinction processes. Sustained amygdalar-hippocampal theta communication has been associated with extinction-resistant fear memories (Sangha et al. ; Lesting et al. ). However, to our knowledge, direct optogenetic or chemogenetic manipulations of this pathway in regard to changes in theta-gamma oscillations during fear and anxiety-related processes are yet to be tested.
Increased theta synchrony between the BLA and mPFC as a safety signal during extinction learning and low anxiety states
Several recent studies provide evidence for similar oscillatory features in the BLA-mPFC network during fear extinction learning and the expression of innate anxiety (Likhtik et al. ; Stujenske et al. ). Animals that were trained to discriminate foot shock-predicting CS+ from neutral stimuli (CS−) predicting relative safety show increased theta synchronization with mPFC theta leading the BLA LFP upon presentation of CS− (Likhtik et al. ). This is associated with entrainment of BLA neuronal activity to mPFC theta input. Strikingly, animals that fail to discriminate the CS+ from CS− (generalizers) do not show such oscillatory features. Similarly, in an open field test, mPFC theta lead over BLA activity is enhanced upon entrance to the periphery associated with relative safety. On the other hand, upon entrance to the more anxiogenic center of the open field mPFC lead is lost and BLA neuron firing is enhanced. Moreover, a genetic mouse model with targeted disruption of the glutamic acid decarboxylase 2 gene (GAD65) shows exaggerated innate anxiety, fear generalization (failure in discrimination of CS+ and CS−), and impaired extinction of cued fear memories together with reduced theta communication between the mPFC and amygdala (Bergado-Acosta et al. ; Sangha et al. ).
Co-occurring fast gamma oscillations are also modulated in a similar fashion during threat evaluation in both fear and anxiety assessing tasks (Stujenske et al. ). Gamma oscillations within the BLA dynamically switch their coupling to either local BLA theta during CS+ (high fear state) or mPFC theta oscillations during CS− (low fear state). In line, extinction learning triggers an enhancement of fast gamma power in mPFC-BLA network with mPFC theta lead over BLA fast gamma oscillations. Similarly, both mPFC theta lead and fast gamma oscillation power are augmented in less anxiogenic peripheral zone in comparison to the centre zone of an open-field in anxious animals (Stujenske et al. ). Together, these studies indicate that safety detection during fear discrimination and innate anxiety use common oscillatory modes, and involve augmented mPFC theta influence on BLA activity while inhibiting fear and/or anxiety.
One remaining issue is how PL and IL cortices differentially modulate fear extinction in oscillatory interaction with the BLA sub-circuits. In line with the role of “fear” and “extinction” neurons in the BLA and their differential functional connectivity with the PL and IL cortex (Herry et al. ; Senn et al. ), respectively, a recent study provides evidence for two types of competitive theta-range oscillations within the BLA and mPFC sub-regions (Davis et al. ). The authors elaborately demonstrate that the extinction of contextual fear memories causes suppression of fear-associated slower 3–6 Hz theta oscillations in comparison to extinction-associated faster 6–12 Hz theta oscillations. These changes were associated with emergence of a new extinction memory circuit and suppression of the fear memory circuits. Strikingly, this reorganization seems to be largely mediated by remodeling in the PV+ interneuron network in the BLA. Indeed, fear relapse after extinction could be induced by BLA PV+ interneuron inactivation resulting in the dominance of fear-associated 3–6 Hz oscillations over extinction-associated 6–12 Hz oscillations with directionality from BLA to PL cortex. In support of these findings, theta-range interaction at slower frequency range (~ 4 Hz) between the BLA and PL cortex has been shown to facilitate the expression of fear (Dejean et al. ; Karalis et al. ), likely due to a disinhibition of projection cells from PL cortex to BLA, elicited by rhythmic PV+ interneuron inhibition in the PL cortex (Courtin et al. ). These independent studies suggest that the switch between the slow (3–6 Hz) theta synchronization in the BLA-PL cortex network and fast (6–12 Hz) theta synchronization in the BLA-IL cortex might be one of the fundamental oscillatory mechanisms regulating the extinction and reconsolidation of emotionally-salient memories. Interestingly, sustained presence of theta oscillations but also gamma oscillations in the PL cortex in comparison to IL cortex might be a risk factor for extinction deficit seen in female rodents in comparison to male rodents (Fenton et al. , ). Such observations might also contribute to the increased PTSD prevalence seen in women in comparison to men (Bangasser et al. ). It needs to be further confirmed whether sustained presence of gamma oscillations in the BLA that correlates with the degree of spontaneous recovery of fear during extinction learning (Courtin et al. ) accompanies these sex-specific oscillatory changes in the mPFC. Whether a differential fear- vs. extinction-associated oscillatory coupling also exists between the VH and the PL vs. IL cortices still needs to be tested.
Altered anxiety states during fear and extinction learning: possible interactions with offline sleep-dependent network oscillations
Sleep-dependent offline memory consolidation is mediated during two distinct sleep states by oscillatory communication within a brain-wide network. Theta oscillations with co-occurring gamma oscillations emerge during REM sleep, whereas hippocampal SW-R and cortical delta oscillations dominate during SWS (Headley and Paré ). Accumulating evidence suggests that both are involved in the consolidation of emotionally-salient fearful memories. These oscillations emerge from similar circuits that generate aforementioned oscillations associated with distinct anxiety states. It has been numerously shown that environmental and genetic manipulations that trigger altered anxiety states can induce sustained changes in morphology, function and plasticity of distinct limbic regions including the hippocampus, amygdala and mPFC (Shors et al. ; Watanabe et al. ; Akirav and Richter-Levin ; Maroun and Richter-Levin ; Chen et al. ; Izquierdo ; Yu et al. ; Soliman et al. ; Li et al. ; Segal et al. ; Maggio and Segal ; Maren and Holmes ; Patel et al. ). It is conceivable that such changes would alter the functional configuration of anxiety and fear networks not only during online processing of conditioned or unconditioned anxiety states but also during offline consolidation-related processes. Thus, heightened anxiety might have a substantial impact on offline oscillatory communication which is one of the most decisive mnemonic states for healthy memory formation.
Limbic theta synchronization during REM sleep is required for emotional memory consolidation: potential involvement in PTSD development
During REM sleep, theta synchronization in the hippocampus-amygdala-mPFC network is augmented after auditory cued fear conditioning in comparison to other vigilance states (Totty et al. ). Others reported that hippocampal theta and gamma range oscillatory activities also appear to be augmented after contextual fear learning during REM sleep episodes (Ognjanovski et al. ). Further, reduction of theta oscillations in the DH specifically during REM sleep in a 4-h post-learning period impairs contextual fear memory without an effect on auditory cued fear memory (Boyce et al. ), suggesting an involvement of REM-sleep associated dorsal hippocampal theta oscillations in contextual fear memory consolidation. Interestingly, theta synchronization between the hippocampus and amygdala during REM sleep correlates with the freezing level during auditory cued fear memory retrieval (Popa et al. ). Along this line, a recent study provides evidence for the role of theta synchronization between the VH and PL cortex in post-extinction REM sleep. The authors further demonstrate that the phase of theta synchronization between the VH and LA predicts the degree of extinction (Totty et al. ). Specifically, the animals with decreased freezing upon extinction show out-of-phase synchrony while increased freezing was associated in-phase synchrony. Considering the critical role of theta phase synchronization in Hebbian plasticity inducing either LTP or LTD (Huerta and Lisman ; Hölscher et al. ; Hyman et al. ), this finding suggests that LTD-like processes are elicited upon successful extinction memory consolidation in the VH-LA pathway. This observation is supported by sustained amygdalo-hippocampal theta phase synchronization in animal models with impaired fear extinction (Sangha et al. ; Lesting et al. ). Maternal separation and isolation stress also induce sustained fear together with augmented theta oscillations in the hippocampus-amygdala-mPFC network during REM sleep periods (Sampath et al. ). Together, these findings signify the importance of limbic theta synchronization during offline REM sleep periods in consolidation of emotionally salient memories and its potential involvement in PTSD development.
Accumulating evidence suggests that sleep disturbances and altered sleep patterns (REM vs. non-REM sleep) are the hallmarks of psychiatric disorders with elevated anxiety such as generalized anxiety or PTSD (Papadimitriou and Linkowski ; Kobayashi et al. ; Goldstein and Walker ; Brownlow et al. ). It appears that orchestrated and balanced release of several neuromodulators associated with high anxiety states (acetylcholine, noradrenaline etc.) during REM sleep play a key role in emotional memory consolidation (Kametani and Kawamura ; Goldstein and Walker ). Specifically, cholinergic input is high during REM sleep whereas the noradrenergic input appears to be minimal (Kametani and Kawamura ; Takahashi et al. ; Gottesmann ; Goldstein and Walker ). An influential model suggests that reduced adrenergic activity during REM sleep is crucial for reducing the emotional component but maintaining the salience of the memory itself (Goldstein and Walker ). Indeed, detection of salient vs. nonsalient information is required for healthy memory formation and its insufficiency may lead to maladaptive/dysfunctional behavior such as exaggerated anxiety that is often seen in PTSD patients (Maren et al. ; Jin and Maren ). Of note, PTSD patients seem to maintain high adrenergic activity during REM sleep potentially counteracting this emotional dampening and resulting in hyper-arousal states in post-sleep awake periods (Goldstein and Walker ). Despite the significance of this hypothesis in treatment of PTSD, to our knowledge, effects of sleep-state dependent (REM vs. SWS) and projection-specific intervention of adrenergic activity on limbic theta synchronization and emotional memory consolidation has not yet been tested.
SWS-associated hippocampal SW-R are required for consolidation of contextual fear memory: potential interaction with altered anxiety states during extinction learning
The role of hippocampal SW-R and their interaction with other limbic oscillations in fear extinction processes are still not sufficiently understood. However, some evidence suggests that PTSD patients might have reduced SWS with diverging effects, either decreasing or increasing slow oscillation/delta power both of which might have a substantial impact on regulation of hippocampal SW-R (Woodward et al. ; Neylan et al. ; Kobayashi et al. ; De Boer and Hofman ). Furthermore, targeted memory re-activation during SWS appears to facilitate emotional memory consolidation in humans (Hauner et al. ; Cairney et al. ; He et al. ; Cellini and Capuozzo ). These findings suggest that SWS-associated limbic oscillations and their co-ordination might also be regulated by emotionally charged events. Indeed, similar to augmented REM sleep-associated theta/gamma oscillations after emotional learning, contextual fear conditioning also strengthens SWS-related delta oscillations and hippocampal SW-R, resulting in heightened and stabilized neuronal firing in the dorsal CA1 circuit (Ognjanovski et al. , ). Chemogenetic blockade of PV+ interneurons in this network during consolidation of a single-trial contextual fear conditioning reduces both ripple power and the stabilization of cellular activity patterns, and leads to impaired contextual fear memory when tested 24 h later (Ognjanovski et al. ). These network effects may result from the induction of sustained PV+ interneuron plasticity and augmented ripple generation in the VH upon contextual fear conditioning (Karunakaran et al. ). Indeed, optogenetic inhibition of PV+ interneuron activity specifically reduces contextual fear memory when applied during post-learning SWS periods, but not during REM sleep (Ognjanovski et al. ). Collectively, these findings support the central role of PV+ interneurons in ripple generation and indicate that post-learning replay events during SW-R are important for consolidation of contextual fear memories. In support, a recent work from our laboratory indicates that augmented SW-R activity in the VH may be a critical factor for the persistence of contextual fear memories (Çalişkan et al. ). Here, in a genetic mouse model with increased PV+ interneuron functionality and increased anxiety (Winkelmann et al. ), using contextual fear conditioning and its extinction paradigms, we found heightened ventral SW-R and intra-hippocampal communication in ex vivo slice preparations (Çalişkan et al. ). Furthermore, recent data from our lab indicates that mouse strains with heightened anxiety and impaired fear extinction intrinsically generate more SW-R in the VH (unpublished observations). We argue that the intrinsically augmented SW-R generation in the VH of these mice promotes (re)-consolidation of contextual fear memories through an augmented reactivation of fear memory engrams during SW-R, outcompeting extinction. Interestingly, ventral SW-R appear to preferentially recruit local neurons that send long-range projections to cortical and subcortical limbic regions including the mPFC and amygdala (Ciocchi et al. ). Furthermore, a subset of BLA neurons appear to be reactivated during SWS and modulated by the hippocampal SW-R (Girardeau et al. ). Thus, it will be interesting to see whether the fear and/or extinction memory encoding engram cells in the hippocampus-BLA-mPFC network are differentially recruited during these consolidation-related network oscillations.
Synthesis
Anxiety processes seem to have several parallel oscillatory changes with those that happen during extinction-related oscillatory dynamics in theta and gamma range (Çalişkan and Stork ). In general, as the anxiolytic features of an experience increase, mPFC influence over other target regions rises similar to what has been reported for extinction-related oscillatory changes (Fig. 2 ). On the other hand, sustained theta-gamma synchronization between the amygdala and hippocampus appear to signal high “unlearned” anxiety states as well as extinction-resistant “learned” fear, and also support offline (re)-consolidation of fear memories during REM sleep. Similarly, elevated SW-R activity during SWS is associated with enhanced consolidation of fearful memories. We propose that extinction learning can trigger competing subsets of SW-R to promote either reactivation of original fear memory engrams via interaction with the amygdalar and PL circuits or activation of extinction memory engrams via interaction with IL and amygdalar circuits (Fig. 3 ). Furthermore, we suggest that heightened baseline anxiety, via augmented hippocampal theta/gamma oscillations during extinction learning, may prompt retrieval of original fear memory traces and interfere with the influence of extinction-promoting regions on hippocampal on-line encoding. This in turn may further boost off-line (re)-consolidation of emotional memory via replay events during hippocampal SW-R but also but also theta-gamma synchronization during REM sleep (Fig. 4 ). These phenomena might lead to sustained recruitment of fear-inducing circuits not only during online evaluation of threat but also during offline consolidation periods. These processes might trigger misbalanced contextualisation (memory specificity vs. lack of context specificity) inducing ambiguity and anxiety, thereby, a fear generalization phenotype that is a core feature of PTSD. Fig. 2 Theta oscillations in the hippocampus-basolateral amygdala-medial prefrontal cortex (H-BLA-mPFC) network mediate expression of both innate anxiety and learned fear. a High unlearned innate anxiety (left) is associated with an increased theta synchronization in the ventral hippocampus (VH)-BLA-mPFC network. Directional influence of mPFC theta on BLA theta and local activity is not prominent. On the other hand, low unlearned innate anxiety (right) is associated with reduced theta synchronization in this network. Specifically, mPFC theta activity leads BLA theta and local activity that suppresses anxiety-like behavior. The dorsal HPC theta is not coherent with the ventral HPC theta or mPFC theta during expression of distinct unlearned anxiety states. b Sustained learned fear (left) is associated with an increased theta synchronization in the VH-BLA-mPFC network but also dorsal hippocampus (DH). Similar to expression of high unlearned anxiety state, directional influence of mPFC theta on BLA theta and local activity is not prominent. Prelimbic (PL) Cortex of mPFC synchronizes in slow theta range (~ 4 Hz) with the BLA during freezing episodes. On the other hand, emergence of slow (3–6 Hz) theta synchronization leading from the BLA to the PL cortex reinforces fear expression. Theta synchronization within IL-BLA network is relatively weaker during fear expression. Theta synchronization between the BLA and HPC can re-emerge upon reconsolidation of a recent contextual fear memory, thus, appears to be critical for fear renewal. Suppressed learned fear (right) is associated with a decreased theta synchronization between the BLA-VH and BLA-DH. IL cortex synchronization at theta range with the hippocampus and BLA is augmented leading the BLA and hippocampal theta. Interestingly, two oscillation types with distinct theta frequencies (slow 3–6 Hz vs. fast 6–12 Hz) compete within the BLA either sustaining or suppressing learned fear, respectively. Successful fear suppression leads to decrease in slow theta synchronization between the BLA and PL cortex whereas fast theta synchronization is augmented within BLA-IL cortex with a directionality BLA == > IL cortex. Note that theta synchronization also changes the local gamma oscillations in both anxiety and fear networks described above (see text for details). The directionality of the signal flow is indicated by arrows. Dashed lines indicate loss of theta synchronization Fig. 3 A working model for competitive reactivation of fear vs. extinction circuits in a brain-wide network during hippocampal sharp wave-ripples (SW-R). Neuronal ensembles formed during a learning episode are reactivated time-locked to hippocampal SW-R during off-line consolidation state, slow wave sleep (SWS). In this working model, upon formation of fear and extinction memory engrams in a distributed network of limbic circuits including the amygdala and hippocampus (HPC), fear and/or extinction neurons are reactivated during SW-R in a competitive manner. Hippocampal ripples broadcast fear- and/or extinction-related spatial- and/or non-spatial contextual information to its limbic partners, amygdala (basolateral amygdala-BLA) and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). Bias for reactivation of hippocampal fear memory engrams predispose for preservation of the fear memory (reconsolidation) via recruiting BLA fear engrams and fear-eliciting prelimbic (PL) circuits. In contrast, bias for reactivation of hippocampal extinction memory engrams facilitates consolidation of extinction memories via recruiting BLA extinction engrams and fear-suppressing IL (infralimbic) circuits Fig. 4 Hypothetical model for the role of sleep-dependent oscillations in PTSD development via sustained high anxiety signaling oscillatory limbic interactions. Augmented hippocampal theta/gamma synchrony triggered by increased baseline anxiety during extinction learning may lead to recruitment of fear-inducing circuits and mask the impact of extinction-promoting regions on hippocampal on-line encoding. This may provoke retrieval of original fear memory traces during extinction which further promote fear memory (re)-consolidation during REM sleep via theta-gamma synchronization or reactivation of fear memory traces during hippocampal SW-R in comparison to extinction-promoting processes. Sustained recruitment of fear-eliciting circuits during on-line and off-line behavioral states via these aberrant oscillations may interfere with fear extinction. Their persistence may trigger a fear generalization phenotype that is a core feature of PTSD
Conclusions and future directions
Monitoring rhythmic LFP patterns and underlying cellular activities allows the detection of functional state of neuronal circuits at a given time-window of information processing including assessment of potentially threatening stimuli that is crucial to guide appropriate behavioral output. Indeed, these oscillatory patterns are tightly linked to processes involved in regulation of fear and extinction memories including synaptic plasticity and engram formation (Bocchio et al. ; Çalişkan and Stork ).
Despite a wealth of available knowledge, several critical issues still need further investigation: Clearly, it is not understood how fear vs. extinction circuits can be differentially recruited to aforementioned network oscillations during on-line and off-line stages of memory modification. Further, the role of hippocampal SW-R in stability of fear memories upon extinction learning has not been investigated systematically yet. Elucidating potentially differential roles of theta-gamma oscillations (REM sleep mode) and SW-R (SWS mode) in off-line processing of fear vs. extinction memories requires closed loop optogenetic intervention without interfering with sleep architecture as recently reported (Boyce et al. ). Moreover, these oscillatory changes in the fear and anxiety brain network should be characterized in a longitudinal manner as most of the anxiety disorders, such as PTSD, develop sometime after a “trigger event.” This approach might give us an opportunity to develop potential intervention methods in a time- and projection-specific manner. In the future, specific network oscillation patterns can potentially be used as electrophysiological biomarkers and point of entry for therapy.