Introduction
One of the most fundamental processes that govern cellular functions is temporal regulation of chromatin remodelling. This dynamic remodelling process of chromatin allows stringent transcriptional control of gene expression cascades that define the global characteristics of particular cell types and, hence, regulate corresponding tissue functions. Though functional consequences of histone modifications are many, the combinations of histone modifications, also aptly described as ‘histone code’ (Jenuwein and Allis ), is believed to correlate to a particular state of chromatin conformation induced by histone-DNA interactions allowing access and recruitment of specific set of transcription factors regulating the transcriptome (Sterner and Berger ; Strahl and Allis ). Since histone modifications play such a crucial role in the global cellular regulations, it is not surprising that aberrant modifications of histone have been implicated in several chronic disorders including cancer and psychiatric disorders. In this review, the prospect of using one of the key histone modifications, i.e. acetylation, as a therapeutic target in psychiatric disorder along with an account of some promising drug candidates and other putative acetyl-histone modulating therapeutic strategies is discussed.
Acetyl-histone homeostasis—a cellular housekeeping parameter
Post-translational acetylation of histones is one of the major epigenetic processes that dynamically modulate gene expression. The transcriptional activity of genes are regulated by the changes in chromatin confirmation which are outcome of the acetylation states of lysine (K) and arginine (R) residues of histone, particularly located at the N-terminal tails of histone isoforms (Strahl and Allis ; Jaenisch and Bird ). Acetylation leads to the disruption of the interaction between histone tails and the negatively charged phosphates of the DNA backbone inducing relaxation of the local chromatin region designated as ‘open’ conformation favouring transcription (Shogren-Knaak et al. ). This transcriptionally active ‘open’ conformation is often temporally regulated and switched into a transcriptionally unfavourable or ‘closed’ form by reversible deacetylation of histones. The enzymatic addition and removal of the acetyl moiety from the K and R residues of histones are catalysed by classes of enzymes called histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC), respectively (Maison et al. ). Therefore, reaction equilibrium between the enzymatic activities of HATs and HDACs (Fig. 1 a) plays a critical role in maintaining the histone acetylation homeostasis promoting tightly controlled gene expression regulation for preserving the inherited functions of the cells. Fig. 1 Histone acetylation homeostasis maintained by reversible actions of HAT and HDAC activities. a Normal cellular functions require preservation of pre-programmed histone acetylation signature by concomitant actions of HATs and HDACs. Undesirable activation of HDAC leading to the sifting of the equilibrium from acetylated form (Ac-NH 2 -histone) towards hypoacetylated (+NH 3 -histone) form of histone and that could be restored by two ways, either ( b ) using HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) or ( c ) using HAT activators or acetate supplementation using glyceryl triacetate (GTA)-like acetate donors facilitating acetylation catalysis by HAT perhaps by augmentation of cellular AcCoA levels (Singh et al. )
Emergence of HDAC inhibitors as drug candidates in psychiatric disorders
The loss of the acetylation/deacetylation equilibrium (Fig. 1 a, b), particularly at the critical juncture of cellular decision making process, can trigger diseases. For example, failure of a cell to decide its fate appropriately—whether to proliferate, to differentiate or to die—promotes deviation from normal to a disease state. According to a simplistic model, cancer is one such example where cells are driven towards uncontrolled proliferation resulting from aberrant histone hypoacetylation leading to undesired repression of gene expression related to tumour suppression (Jones and Baylin ; Glozak and Seto ; Sharma et al. ). Similarly, stimulating research in the last decade has established the importance of preserving cellular acetyl-histone homeostasis in determining the neural fate and guiding brain developmental processes. The regulation of neuronal development appears to be controlled by the redundant actions of HDAC1 and HDAC2. These deacetylases are demonstrated to be essential for the differentiation of neural progenitor cells to mature neurons leading to overall brain development (Montgomery et al. ). Though lack of either HDAC1 or HDAC2 did not show histologically visible CNS abnormality, knocking out both the HDACs led to gross structural brain damage in mice model. However, specificity and individual contribution of each of these HDACs cannot be ignored in maintaining neurological functions. This observation was supported by a recent report by Bahari-Javan et al. ( ) who demonstrated a specific link between schizophrenia and HDAC1 expression in the prefrontal cortex. Hdac 1, when over-expressed in a site-specific manner in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), induced impaired synaptic plasticity, short-term memory and prepulse inhibition (PPI) of the startle response (Bahari-Javan et al. ). Although HDAC1 was also found to be elevated in the hippocampus of the post-mortem brains of schizophrenic subjects, genetic manipulations of HDAC1 in the hippocampus of mouse model of early life stress induced schizophrenia did not show significant effects on behavioural phenotypes. On the other hand, Guan et al. ( ) provided unequivocal evidence that HDAC2, but not HDAC1, plays pivotal role in maintaining spine density, synaptic numbers and synaptic plasticity and, thus, promoting learning and memory formation. The establishment of the mechanistic link between over-expression of HDAC2 and impairment of learning and long-term memory confirmed HDAC2 as a molecular target for cognitive dysfunction (Wagner et al. ). This result validated the previous finding by Peleg and co-workers who demonstrated ( ) the association between restoration of histone acetylation (histone H4 lysine 12) in the hippocampus and new memory formation. However, mechanistic regulation of memory formation via modulation of post-translational histone acetylation is not restricted to the involvement of HDAC2 alone; HDAC3 has also been found to play a role in suppressing long-term memory formation (McQuown et al. ). HDAC3 knock-out in the CA1 region of the dorsal hippocampus as well as pharmacological inhibition of HDAC3 activity led to enhanced long-term memory formation. The HDAC3-mediated regulatory mechanism is believed to be far more complex than it was initially envisaged. HDAC3 appears to be associated with a corepressor multi-protein complex (NCoR/SMRT) that also includes class II HDACs, specifically HDAC4 and HDAC5 (McQuown and Wood ; Wen et al. ). Interestingly, deletion of HDAC3 resulted in decrease in HDAC4 expression indicating an interplay between class I and class II HDACs in the hippocampus. Thus, it became quite obvious that targeting HDACs with HDAC inhibitors (HDACis) to augment histone acetylation and thereby restoring the skewed acetyl-histone equilibrium became one of the exciting strategies for treating neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders where cognitive deterioration forms one of the core symptoms (Fig. 1 b).
Acetylation-mediated epigenetic regulation has long been appreciated as one of the key post-mitotic neuronal mechanisms promoting memory formation and consolidation (Marcus et al. ; Day and Sweatt ). With the emergence of knowledge that the complex pathophysiology of debilitating psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia and depression goes beyond the ‘one disease, one gene’ paradigm, the strategy of targeting HDAC has been adopted to encounter most endophenotypic changes associated with psychiatric disorders as well (Fuchikami et al. ). Moreover, another strategy of application of HDAC inhibitors (HDACis) has emerged where HDACis were found to act synergistically augmenting the efficacy of antipsychotics on co-administration (Guidotti et al. ). This was supported by the findings that pre-treatment with HDAC inhibitors like valproic acid or entinostat (MS-275) appears to increase the efficacy and reduce side-effects of haloperidol in aged mice model (Montalvo-Ortiz et al. ; Montalvo-Ortiz et al. ). These results address a very important long-standing issue related to the usage of antipsychotics in elderly patients. There are strong evidences now that age-related drift in the global acetyl-histone levels might potentially drive extensive long-lasting changes in the chromatin architecture affecting not only the brain function but also the entire peripheral physiology (Peleg et al. ; Peleg et al. ). It is quite likely that administration of HDACi restores the repertoire of genes whose expressions are compromised during the ageing process and prime them for aiding enhanced efficacy of the antipsychotics in a synergistic manner. It is possible that HDACis, while helping the antipsychotic to recalibrate its target(s), could also be facilitating its bioavailability and metabolic removal from the system. Thus, taking cues from the promising animal studies in neuropsychiatric disease models, along with the knowledge about early success of valproic acid as antiepileptic/mood stabilising drug (Johannessen ; Phiel et al. ) and realising the importance of maintaining acetyl-histone homeostasis in mediating synaptic plasticity, HDACs evolved as critical molecular target in neuropsychiatric disorders during the last decade.
HDAC inhibitors in psychiatric disorders—clinical trials and current status
Plethora of studies implicates hypoacetylation and hyperactivity of HDACs (Fig. 1 b) in the neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disease aetiology (Sharma et al. ; Morris et al. ; Volmar and Wahlestedt ). Data from these preclinical animal studies and post-mortem brain has supported the therapeutic strategy of targeting HDAC in neuropsychiatric dysfunction. However, the transitions of these promising HDACis in the area of neuropsychiatry from preclinical to the clinical stage have been extremely limited so far. Few promising HDACis, as listed in Table 1 , including valproic acid, vorinostat and sodium butyrate are being evaluated for antipsychotic activities in clinical trials. Among these, valproate formulations like Stavzor received approval as a new drug in 2008 from U.S. Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) to treat seizures and manic or mixed episodes associated with bipolar disorder (manic-depressive disorder). Table 1 List of some promising HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) evaluated in clinical trials for psychiatric disorders compiled from www.clinicaltrails.gov (March 2018). Search criteria used for the compilation are ‘Psychiatric disorder’ plus the ‘drug name’ Open image in new window
Valproate has long history for treatment of epilepsy (Depakote approved on June 1996). Though not yet approved for bipolar disorder, it is regarded as better option for dual diagnosis patients like those with bipolar disorder and alcohol dependence (Salloum et al. ). In addition, divalproex, a valproate formulation, was evaluated for combination therapy with atypical antipsychotics like olanzapine or risperidone among acutely hospitalised patients with schizophrenia (Casey et al. ). It appears that inclusion of valproate improved the positive symptoms of the patients as compared to the mono-antipsychotic therapy. But, the overall results related to the efficacy of valproate in schizophrenic patients seem to be inconclusive so far (Wang et al. ) and warrant large-scale studies to assess benefits versus risk aspect. Similar studies using a hydroxamate class of HDACi, vorinostat (also known as suberanilohydroxamic acid (SAHA)), has been initiated to determine whether it can augment the efficacy of a second-generation antipsychotic, clozapine, in schizophrenic patients ( ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03263533). Recently, SAHA has been approved by the US FDA for treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL). However, efficacy of SAHA alone is yet to be tested in clinical set-up for neuropsychiatric disorders. Extensive studies using SAHA in animal models show promise in restoring spatial memory advocating a need for a clinical trial for efficacy in cognitive dysfunction (Benito et al. ). Thus, this combination therapy is not only expected to reveal whether SAHA can improve the efficacy of clozapine in clozapine-resistant patients but also whether it can augment clozapine effect on restoration or protection of cognitive impairments in schizophrenic patients.
Another HDACi, sodium butyrate, has also been evaluated in clinical trials for its efficacy in cognitive symptoms in schizophrenia ( ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03010865). Moreover, it has also been demonstrated to possess putative anti-depressant activity in preclinical studies (Wei et al. ). One of the interesting aspects is that butyric acid has been found to be a key metabolite produced by the gut microbiota and has been believed to play a role in regulating brain physiology and behaviour (Stilling et al. ). Since butyric acid is an endogenous molecule, it is tempting to extrapolate that this short-chain fatty acid-based HDACi could perhaps be better tolerated at low concentrations than the synthetic HDACis for therapeutic use in psychiatric disorders.
Although more than 2480 clinical trials (total studies) have been conducted or in progress so far with various HDACis, only about 209 (8–9%) of these studies are conducted in the area of psychiatric disorders exclusively, excluding studies on neurodegeneration. The following HDACis were used for searching the Clinical Trials database ( www.clinicaltrails.gov ): valproic acid/valproate, sodium butyrate/butyrate, SAHA/vorinostat, sodium phenylbutyrate, growth factor (FRM-0334/alzforum), nicotinamide, belinostat, panobinostat, pracinostat, AR 42/HDAC42, entinostat (MS-275), benzamide (CI-994/tacedinaline), cyclic peptides/depsipeptide (FK-228: romidepsin) and electrophilic ketone (beta-hydroxybutyrate). To obtain the ‘total studies’ number, the option for ‘disease’ or ‘conditions’ was kept blank and for obtaining the number of studies on psychiatric disorders, the key word ‘psychiatric disorder’ was used using the drop-down menu. Thus, searching the above HDACis individually in combination with the disease or condition, the study numbers were eventually combined to arrive at the above number. It is to be noted that due to the absence of controlled vocabulary (CV) in the Clinical Trials database, search outputs might vary to some extent depending on the usage of the search phrases. However, majority of the studies with HDACi are conducted in the area of cancer therapy.
HDAC inhibitors in psychiatric disorders—the pitfalls
Though literature confirms the association of hyperactive HDACs to several neuropsychiatric disorders, the lack of major success of HDACi in clinical trials perhaps could be attributed to complex aetiology of the disease. The potential molecular mechanisms that underlie the HDAC actions in psychiatric diseases appear to be orchestrating cellular events at multiple levels. The putative mechanisms include, but are not limited to, (a) neuroprotective role, where HDAC induces gene expression of neurpotective proteins including type-2 metabotropic glutamate (mGluR2) receptors, BDNF, and Rac1 (Mahgoub and Monteggia ), and (b) anti-inflammatory effects, where hypoacetylation could suppress expression of pro-inflammatory factors like IL6, iNOS and NF-κB along with several others (Müller et al. ). In this context, there is a possibility that these multipronged effects of modulation of histone acetylation may result from aberrant activities of more than one HDAC isoform in tissue specific manner. This regulatory concept, for example, is supported by the findings that the activities of HDAC2 and HDAC5 appears to be correlated to pro-depressant and anti-depressant functions, respectively (Peña et al. ). A simplistic explanation for this see-saw effect mediated by the two separate classes of HDAC could be that the regulatory preference of each HDAC is specific for subsets of gene population which might converge in inducing behavioural phenotypes related to psychiatric diseases. Thus, the regulatory complexity of HDAC-mediated processes elevates the degree of difficulty in targeting HDAC as therapeutic option in neuropsychiatric disorders. This is perhaps reflected by high failure rates of HDACi molecules in clinical trials for evaluating therapeutic intervention in psychiatric disorders.
The translational challenges for HDACi-based drugs is generally well anticipated in terms of preserving specificity and preventing off-target effects as there exist about 18 HDAC isoforms with mostly ubiquitous distribution in the CNS and peripheral tissues (Volmar and Wahlestedt ). Also, the complexity is further heightened with the possibility that the targeted HDACs not only deacetylates histones but might also involve in the regulation of non-histone proteins that participate in routine cellular events. Thus, it is quite likely that these inhibitors might interfere with the housekeeping functions in non-targeted tissues inducing toxic side-effects (Hasan et al. ). Further in this context, one of the major concerns will be treating the gerontopsychiatric patients and their ability to tolerate the effective doses for an extended period of treatment. It is estimated that 5–8% of the population worldwide above 60 years of age suffer from cognitive decline or severe age-associated neuropsychiatric dysfunction (WHO fact sheet, April 2016). Thus, it is highly desirable that proper pharmacovigilance be conducted while administering HDACi-based drugs in aged population (60 years and above). Nonetheless, the promising leads using HDACi as candidate drugs for neuropsychiatric disorders have highlighted the importance of cellular acetyl-histone homeostasis in the CNS function making it a ‘high risk, high reward’ intervention target in psychiatric disorders.
Application of alternative acetyl-histone modulators in psychiatry
As an alternative therapeutic approach, modulators of histone acetyltransferases (HAT) for the selective regulation of gene expression have been investigated as well in experimental psychosis models. However, the search for HAT modulators were outpaced and outnumbered by the rapid discoveries of synthetic HDACi molecules. So far, with an exception of curcumin (diferuloylmethane), none of the HAT modulators is in clinical trial for treating psychiatric dysfunction. Super-Curcumin capsules or Curcumin C-3 Complex was evaluated for its efficacy to improve negative symptoms and cognition in schizophrenia (NCT number: NCT01875822). Apart from this, a small molecule activator of histone acetyltransferase (p300/CBP), CTPB ( N -(4-chloro-3-trifluoromethyl-phenyl)-2-ethoxy-6-pentadecyl-benzamide), has raised some interest as a facilitator of neurite growth and differentiation (Hegarty et al. ; Balasubramanyam et al. ). However, these molecules are still in their early days to be perceived as drug candidates.
Alternative to targeting specifically the HDAC and HAT activities, another approach counteracting the acetylation/deacetylation imbalance has emerged in the last few years. This strategy takes advantage of enriching the cellular acetate pool by augmenting acetyl coenzyme A (AcCoA) using an exogenous acetate carrier like glyceryl triacetate (GTA) or triacetin (Mathew et al. ; Reisenauer et al. ). GTA has been regarded as safe for its use as food additives by the FDA (Fiume and Cosmetic Ingredients Review Expert Panel ). Encouraging results for metabolic acetate supplementation in Canavan disease (CD) model using GTA led to the adoption of this molecule for possible intervention in other neurological conditions as well (Arun et al. , ; Soliman and Rosenberger ). It is now established that treatment of GTA induces histone acetylation in rodent models as well as in mammalian cells facilitating protection against aberrant cellular events (Soliman et al. , Long et al. , Singh et al. ).
Interestingly, orally administered GTA was recently demonstrated by us to block N -methyl D -aspartate (NMDA) receptor hypofunction-induced cognitive disruption in rodent model of experimental psychosis (Singh et al. ). This work led to the understanding that the hippocampal acetyl-histone homeostasis could be maintained by GTA treatment. This observation is highly significant as GTA is believed to augment AcCoA levels in brain tissues and induce expression AcCoA synthesising enzyme perhaps facilitating HAT activity to reverse histone hypoacetyled states (Arun et al. ; Reisenauer et al. ; Soliman et al. ). Though the exact mechanism is still being investigated, the efficacy of acetate supplementation in NMDA receptor hypofunction model highlights the translational importance of replenishing the metabolic ‘acetate’ demand in brain tissues resulting in restoration of hypoacetylation of histones. NMDA receptor antagonists like MK-801 has been shown to induce deacetylation of histones, particularly hippocampal histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) (Singh et al. ). It appears that oral supplementation of GTA restores acetly-H3K9 levels and concomitantly ameliorates the behavioural phenotypes in mice induced by NMDA receptor hypofunction (Fig. 1 c). Thus, as an alternative to targeting HDACs with inhibitors in neuropsychiatric disorders, metabolic acetate supplementation could be an emerging strategy with an aim to restore the neuronal histone hypoacetylation status bypassing the use of potentially toxic HDAC inhibitors.
Conclusion
It is now universally accepted that appropriate functioning of cellular histone acetylation machinery could be one of the key mechanisms guiding neuronal plasticity, learning and memory. Thus, targeting to restore histone acetylation homeostasis holds immense promise in the context of neuropsychiatric diseases and related cognitive impairments. However, not many candidate molecules are viewed as ‘druggable’ at the moment or are better than the antipsychotics in use. Unlike cancer, the nature of psychiatric disorders might necessitate longer time usage of these molecules. So, the challenge will remain on how to make these acetyl-histone modifiers more suitable for long-time usage in patients without compromising other essential off-target physiological processes.