Introduction
Numerous drugs administered to breastfeeding women are detectable in nursing infants during periods of neonatal brain development. The long-term consequences of drug exposure during breastfeeding are unknown for all classes of psychoactive drugs because of the absence of clinical trials (Orsolini and Bellantuono ; Khan et al. ; Merlob and Schaefer ; O’Hara and McCabe ; Shah and Aftab ; Glover and Clinton ; Ellfolk and Hultzsch ; Davanzo et al. ; di Scalea and Wisner, , ; Simar ; Fortinguerra et al. ; Ito ; Meador and Loring ; Metz and Stickrath ; Newport et al. ; Pacchiarotti et al. ; Pearlstein ; Reece-Stremtan and Marinelli ; Shaw ; Weisskopf et al. ; Wang et al. ). Post-marketing findings and drug registries are the principal means for identifying long-term adverse reactions from drug exposure during breastfeeding; the time from approval to the first post-market safety event was 4.2 years and the proportion of novel therapeutics affected by a post-market safety event after 10 years was 30.8% (Downing et al. ).
From a public health perspective, inclusion of breastfeeding women in clinical trials would be beneficial; the individual woman, however, is unlikely to voluntarily participate in such trials unless lacking other options. There is no obvious solution to this dilemma. Patients lack reliable information concerning the safety of individual drugs administered off-label to hundreds of thousands of breast feeding women (Hale and Rowe ; Briggs and Freeman ). Drug manufacturers and the FDA provide little specific guidance; the nursing mother is advised to consult her healthcare provider who typically lacks reliable information for prescribing practice in breastfeeding women. No psychotropic medications have been approved for postpartum treatment by the FDA or Health Canada (Misri et al. ).
The breastfeeding woman with serious medical challenges often is conflicted. Should she accept treatment that eases her burden but may place her child at risk? Drugs that ease postpartum depression, for example, may have long-term adverse behavioral consequences for the child, but untreated depression also is associated with offspring risks. Although the benefits of breastfeeding are well established (e.g., Salone et al. ; Wang et al. ) and widely promoted, infants fed on formulas also thrive (Kent et al. ). Hence, women should be made aware of the relative risks and benefits to herself and her infant of drug intake during the postpartum, so that they can make informed decisions as to whether to breastfeed or not. At present there is no definitive answer to this conundrum. There is, clearly, an urgent need for development of accessible evidence-based guidelines for drug use by breastfeeding women (Amir ; Wang et al. ).
Given the limitations of human research, the present review assessed whether risk mitigation for children can be achieved by enhanced preclinical behavioral testing of offspring of rodent mothers exposed to drugs during lactation. The existence of valid animal models for many human behavioral disorders is well established and a promising avenue for identifying lactation drugs that pose significant human behavioral risks. A previous analysis revealed a congruence of behavioral and cognitive impairments in rodent offspring exposed to drugs during gestation, with similar deficits sustained by children and adults with comparable drug histories (Zucker ).
Animal models
Animal models can be utilized to assess whether drug treatment during lactation poses significant long-term behavioral risks to children. Rodent models of human behavior with substantial face validity, predictive validity, or construct validity (Bourin ) are well described (Graham et al. ; Homberg et al. ; Henck et al. ) but are not without limitations (McArthur ; Bespalov et al. ; Wang et al. ). The extent to which behavioral changes in rodents mirror clinical conditions in infants/children was evaluated in several recent reviews (Glover and Clinton ; Homberg et al. ; Henck et al. ).
Tasks validated for cross-species investigation of cognition include rodent models that enhance understanding of cognitive pathology in humans (Cope et al. ) and generate mechanistic insights into neurodevelopmental disorder pathogenesis (Homberg et al. ). Rodent studies delineate drug effects difficult to detect in clinical trials that often lack well-defined or validated behavioral outcomes; typically, the number of exposures and duration of treatment and follow-up are limited (Henck et al. ). Rodent models are not without downsides. None of the current animal models, for example, replicates the relapsing–remitting nature of major depression, and few specifically target female rodents, or evaluate drug treatments sensitive to sex differences (Czéh et al. ). During lactation, rodent pups exposed to drugs through mothers’ milk are more immature and undergo significantly more brain development than is the case for nursing human infants. The maternal behavior of the nursing rodent dam substantially influences developmental trajectories of her offspring, separate from effects transmitted via milk (Nephew and Febo ); behavior of human mothers during breastfeeding also impacts offspring trajectories (Strathearn and Mayes ) but whether to a similar extent as in rodents is unknown.
The impact of antidepressants is with few exceptions evaluated in non-depressed rodent dams; in contrast, antidepressant medications typically are administered to breastfeeding mothers suffering from postpartum depression. To increase translational impact, future drug studies should be conducted on lactating rodent models of postpartum depression (e.g., Gobinath et al. ).
Commonly deployed rodent behavioral tests
Individual rodent tests are listed in Table 1 . The following account is from Zucker ( ). Light-dark preference tests and the open field test (OFT) measure anxiety-like behavior (Bourin ); the Porsolt forced swim test (FST) and learned helplessness tests measure behavioral despair and components of depression-like behavior; social interaction and resident intruder tests assess social behavior and autism-like behaviors; hyper-locomotion in the home cage and in the OFT assess attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and the Morris water, radial arm, and Cincinnati mazes assess cognitive behavior (e.g., learning and memory). Passive and active avoidance tests measure fear, anxiety, and learning in rats and mice. Some animal models of postpartum depression (PPD) are based on withdrawal from a steroid hormone-simulated pregnancy that induces depressive-like behaviors, including increased immobility in the FST and sucrose anhedonia (Brummelte and Galea ) and others utilize olfactory-bulbectomized rats (Kelly et al. ), the exogenous corticosterone model (Gobinath et al. ), or knockout mice (e.g., Brielmaier et al. ). Table 1 Rodent behavior tests Rodent behavioral assays Behaviors measured Interpreted as measure of Light-dark test Time spent in light compartment Anxiety Open field test Number of line crossings, square entries, defecation Anxiety Sex behavior males Intromissions; ejaculation Libido Sex behavior females Lordosis reflex; approach to male Libido Social interaction test Time spent in proximity to a conspecific Autism spectrum disorder Morris water maze Acquisition and spatial localization of relevant visual cues Spatial learning; cognition Cincinnati maze Escape latency from the maze and number of errors made Egocentric learning and memory; cognition Passive avoidance test Latency to return to previously punished location Learning; fear; anxiety? Active avoidance test Latency and number trials to avoid a signaled shock Learning; fear Elevated plus maze Proportion of time spent in the open arms of the maze Anxiety Learned helplessness Experience of inescapable shock in one context results in failure to escape shock in a novel context Depression Resident intruder test Attack of intruder Aggression Locomotor activity Wheel running; number of movements in home cage or other apparatus Attention deficit disorder Radial arm maze Reference memory is assessed when the rats only visit the arms of the maze that contain the reward. The failure to do so will result in reference memory error. Working memory is assessed when the rats enter each arm a single or multiple times Reference and working memory; spatial learning Forced swim test Measures of immobility and absence of escape attempts Stress; depression; coping ability Sucrose preference test Measures preference for sucrose over water Anhedonia, depression
Data acquisition
Each drug was subject in 2017 to a search of the ISI Web of Science (WOS; Thompson Scientific). Separate searches were performed for humans, rats, and mice with the key words “drug name” (e.g., fluoxetine), AND “species name” (rats, mice, or human), AND “lactation.” Searches were repeated substituting the term “breastfeeding” for “lactation.” Relevant studies were examined with emphasis on long-term behavioral assessment of offspring. References cited in target articles revealed additional germane reports that were accessed.
WOS searches were conducted with the key word “lactation” followed by one of the following terms: postpartum depression, antiepileptic drugs, benzodiazepines, analgesics, anxiolytics, sedatives, antipsychotics, marijuana, and morphine with keywords psychoactive drugs and neurodevelopment. Searches were conducted in PubMed with keywords “postnatal” or “perinatal,” “drug name,” and “behavior.” The LactMed (toxnet) data base was searched for behavioral effects of specific drugs ( https://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/newtoxnet/lactmed.htm ). The FDA archive ( http://www.fda.gov/drugs/default.htm ) was consulted for details of preclinical behavioral testing. For most drugs approved prior to 2000, detailed preclinical FDA data are not available electronically and were not accessed. Where available, product information provided by drug manufacturers was examined. The 10th edition of Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation: A Reference Guide to Fetal and Neonatal Risk by Briggs and Freeman ( ) and Medications in Mothers’ Milk (Hale and Rowe ) were consulted for each drug.
Rodent behavioral data for offspring exposed to drugs only during lactation were available for only 11 of 80 drugs surveyed. The decision to include only articles in which drugs were administered during the postpartum period, and not pregnancy as well, was based on the observation that many women are treated with drugs exclusively during the postpartum. The quality of articles reviewed varied; studies below threshold were excluded, others with insufficient sample sizes were so identified. Most experiments and rodent drug trials conducted prior to 2000 employed small sample sizes susceptible to false negatives yielding conclusions that a drug is free of adverse behavioral sequelae; significant effects, however, might be revealed in adequately powered studies. Studies with sample sizes under 10 per group were excluded in accord with recommendations from the organization for economic cooperation and development (OECD), unless they reported statistically significant differences attributable to drug treatment. In many instances, only male animals were tested limiting generalizability of findings (Beery and Zucker ). Consideration of mechanisms of action by which lactational drug exposure impacts postnatal rodent behavior was for the most part beyond the scope of the present analysis.
Based on trajectories of brain development in rats and mice, neurodevelopment at postnatal day 7 (PN 7) is equivalent to that of the human brain at birth (Andrews and Fitzgerald ; Dobbing and Sands ). The interval from PN 7 to 21 or slightly later corresponds to human infant brain development at the onset of breastfeeding (reviewed in Clancy et al. ; Workman et al. ; Semple et al. ). Translational value of rodent work would be maximized if drugs were administered orally to lactating dams beginning at days 7–10 and extending to weaning at day 21 or slightly later. I was unable to locate such studies. In an indirect approach, I conducted a separate analysis of studies in which drugs were administered directly to rodent pups beginning on PN 8, extending through weaning between PN 21 and 28. A caveat is that the drug dosages pups receive via injection are unlikely to mimic those obtained from mothers’ milk.
Results
Buist et al. ( ) enumerated the factors that affect human infant drug exposure during lactation, including maternal pharmacokinetics, transport of the drug into breast milk, and pharmacokinetics of the developing infant. Neonates have a reduced capacity to metabolize and excrete drugs, so metabolites can accumulate in the infant’s system. Even when only small amounts of a drug cross to the infant during a single nursing bout, potentially toxic levels may accumulate over time. Older infants are at lower risk as they ingest lower volumes of breast milk after 7 months of age and metabolize drugs more efficiently (Davanzo et al. ). Many reviews assess the impact of psychoactive drug exposure during breastfeeding on infant behavioral development, but with one exception, data are available only for the first 2 years of the infant’s life.
Prenatal drug exposure changes the pattern and incidence of infant side effects during breastfeeding (Newton and Hale ); consequently, studies with combined pre- and postnatal drug treatments are not considered in this review.
Antidepressants
The transfer of antidepressants into human breast milk generates infant serum concentrations undetectable in most cases for nortriptyline and paroxetine but exceeds the recommended 10% maternal level for citalopram and fluoxetine in 17–22% of cases. Substantial accumulation of doxepin, sertraline, and lithium has been reported among breastfed infants (Sachs ; ABM clinical protocol #18).
Plasma levels may not accurately predict the biochemical effect of an antidepressant on the brain; a low or undetectable infant plasma concentration does not guarantee that the antidepressant will have no effect on the developing nervous system (Weissman et al. ). The long-term behavioral impact of exposure to antidepressants during lactation is unknown (Ito ; Pearlstein ; di Scalea et al. , ; Newport et al. ; Davanzo et al. ; Weissman et al. ; Weisskopf et al. ). Establishing life-time consequences of drug exposure on neurocognitive development of breastfed infants would best emerge from large-scale studies with placebo controls (Fortinguerra et al. ; O’Hara and McCabe ; Davanzo et al. ; Shaw ; Simar ).
Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine (FLX) was the first SSRI antidepressant approved by the FDA in 1987. The long-term effects on neurobehavior and development of children exposed to FLX during nursing have not been adequately studied (Briggs and Freeman ).
Rodents
All relevant animal studies were completed years after FDA approval (Table 2 ). FLX treatment of rat dams during lactation (5 mg/kg/day) compromised sexual behavior of male offspring in adulthood with additional long-term effects on sexual differentiation of the brain (Rayen et al. ). Identical FLX exposure increased sexual behavior in adult female rat offspring (Rayen et al. ). FLX treatment (5 mg/kg/day) during lactation increased behavioral despair in the forced swim test in adult female offspring, and decreased hippocampal BDNF exon IV mRNA levels, which was negatively correlated with immobility (Boulle et al. ). Anxiety increased in non-stressed adult offspring after lactational FLX exposure with decreased BDNF IV and TrkB mRNA expression (Boulle et al. ). Adult male and female rat offspring exposed to 10 mg FLX during lactation exhibited more serotonin-dependent behavior in the forced swim test. Sample sizes in this study ranged from 6 to 8 (Gobinath et al. ). Table 2 Behaviors displayed by rat and mouse offspring in adulthood after exposure to psychoactive drugs during lactation Drug FDA approval date Behavioral data References Fluoxetine 1987 Decreased male and increased female sex behavior; increased anxiety in rats Rayen et al. ( , ); Gobinath et al. ( ); Boulle et al. ( , ) Sulpiride – Decreased female sex behavior in rats de Azevedo Camin et al. ( ); Vieira et al. ( ) Methadone 1947 Increased ambulation in male rats Daly et al. ( ) Methylphenidate 1955 Increased anxiety; decreased activity in mice Ponchio et al. ( ) Imipramine 1959 Increased locomotor activity and increased emotionality in rats Broitman and Donoso ( ) Clomipramine 1996 Increased emotionality in rats Broitman and Donoso ( ) Chlordiazepoxide 1960 Impaired learning in rats Coen et al. ( ) Diazepam 1963 Impaired learning and hyperactivity; decreased anxiety in rats Frieder et al. ( ); Silva and Palermo-Neto ( ) Bromopride – Impaired learning in male rats Felicio et al. ( ); Nasello and Felicio ( ) Methamphetamine 2004 Decreased locomotion, increased anxiety in rats Hrubá et al. ( ); Hrubá et al. ( )
A presently underutilized approach in which depressed lactating rodents are challenged with psychoactive drugs (Brummelte and Galea ; Kelly et al. ) more nearly simulates the status of postpartum-depressed women who undergo drug treatment. Gobinath et al. ( ) tested rat dams rendered depressed by corticosterone treatment during days 2–23 of lactation and concurrently treated with FLX (5 or 10 mg/kg) or a saline vehicle. In adulthood male but not female offspring with postpartum, FLX exposure exhibited increased anxiety-like behavior and impaired hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis negative feedback; density of immature hippocampal neurons was increased in males but decreased in females, revealing a substantial sex difference in the effect of early postnatal FLX exposure.
FLX exposure during nursing impacts behavioral, endocrine, and neural outcomes, with adult male offspring more vulnerable than females with regard to anxiety-like behavior, HPA axis negative feedback regulation, and hippocampal neurogenesis; striking sex differences emphasize the importance of studying both males and females in drug studies (Hughes ; Beery and Zucker ).
One can speculate that deficits in adult human sexual behavior and increased anxiety will emerge as a consequence of exposure to FLX during breastfeeding; such effects have been reported in adult humans treated with FLX (Sidi et al. ).
Antipsychotics
The long-term effects of antipsychotics in offspring exposed during breastfeeding have a maximum follow-up period of 18 months (Uguz ). The dearth of information regarding safety of antipsychotic drugs during breastfeeding is striking; long-term behavioral consequences of antipsychotic drug exposure during lactation are in need of investigation (Pacchiarotti et al. ).
Rodents
Sulpiride
Offspring of rat dams treated with 2.5 or 25 mg/kg/day sulpiride (SUL) throughout lactation displayed normal estrous cycles and estradiol concentrations in adulthood, but female sexual receptivity was reduced (de Azevedo Camin et al. ), presumably mediated by dopaminergic pathways. Sexual behavior of similarly treated adult male offspring, with few exceptions, was not affected, although there were effects of SUL treatment on testes weight, and volume and histology of seminiferous tubules (Vieira et al. ).
Anti-seizure medications (antiepileptic drugs)
The duration of most studies is inadequate to establish long-term cumulative antiepileptic drugs (AED) effects on cognition (Meador and Loring ). The quality of the literature on the transfer of anticonvulsants to breast milk is low, rendering it difficult to assess the safety of anticonvulsants administration. Existing studies generally lack information on sampling methods, the number of samples in a particular dose interval, and enrolled a low number of study participants (Davanzo et al. ). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists classified valproate, carbamazepine (CBZ), and olanzapine as safer and lamotrigine, risperidone, aripiprazole, and clozapine as moderately safe, with ziprasidone possibly hazardous (Pope et al. ). CBZ and valproic acid (VPA) had a good level of safety and low doses of lamotrigine may be considered during breastfeeding (Pacchiarotti et al. ). None of the above studies, however, assessed post-infancy behavior and cognition of offspring after exposure to AEDs exclusively during lactation. Meador et al. ( ) reported no adverse effects of AED exposure via breast milk at 3 and 6 years of age. Because mothers also were treated with AEDs during pregnancy, assessment of the effects due to breastfeeding was not possible. Meador and Loring ( ) advocate more specific FDA guidelines on monitoring and evaluation of cognitive effects of AED exposure in neonates and older children.
Rodents
Exposure to AEDs at therapeutic concentrations increases brain cell death when treatment occurs during early postnatal life in rodents, coincident with brain maturation (Bath and Pimentel ; Wang et al. ; Yochum et al. ); decreases in cell numbers in the hypothalamus, hippocampus, and cerebrum are associated with long-term behavioral deficits, even when treatment is restricted to just a few days. Cell death in the developing brain occurs after neonatal exposure to phenobarbital, phenytoin, VPA, and vigabatrin but not carbamazepine, levetiracetam, lamotrigine, or topiramate (reviewed in Kellogg and Meador ).
A separate analysis (Table 3 ) was conducted in which drugs were administered directly to rodent pups beginning on PN 7–8, which corresponds to human brain development at birth. Treatments were extended through weaning at postnatal days 21–28, encompassing the final two thirds of mouse and rat lactation. In rats, clomipramine affected circadian rhythms, consistently reduced male sex behavior, and increased REM sleep and anhedonia. Lamotrigine induced spatial learning deficits, and decreased social exploration; similar deficits were documented for phenobarbital and phenytoin. Retigabine increased social interactions but decreased exploration. Citalopram reduced male sex behavior in rats and mice, inconsistently affected locomotor activity and immobility, diminished novel object exploration, and reduced social behavior. Bupropion exerted sex-specific effects on novel object exploration, increased locomotion, and reduced social behavior, whereas fluoxetine reduced male sex behave and reduced novel object exploration and social behavior (Table 3 ). Whether milk transfer from the dam to offspring induces similar neural and behavioral effects compared to postnatal direct treatment of offspring, is, for the most part, unknown. It is instructive that FLX reaching offspring via mothers milk, or directly to pups via injection, produces similar decrements in male sex behavior and similar anxiogenic effects. Clomipramine in both paradigms appears to increase emotionality. The majority of studies investigated only male offspring. Table 3 Effects of early postnatal drug treatment on behavior in adulthood Species Treatment Treatment on postnatal days Dosage and route Behavior measured Behavioral results Sex References Rats Clomipramine 8–21 15 mg/kg sc Circadian drinking rhythm Circadian spectral magnitude increased in both sexes; circadian amplitude increased in females M, F Dwyer and Rosenwasser (1998) Rats Clomipramine 8–21 20 mg/kg ip Sucrose preference test; REM sleep; Increased REM sleep, decreased sucrose preference M Kovács et al. ( ) Rats Lamotrigine 7–13 20 mg/kg; ip Seizure threshold; MWM; social exploration Decreased seizure threshold; spatial learning deficit; decreased social exploration M Forcelli et al. ( ) Rats Phenobarbital 7–13 75 mg/kg; ip MWM; social exploration; EPM deficit in spatial learning; decreased social exploration; fear conditioning deficit M Forcelli et al. ( ); Frankel et al. ( ) Rats Phenytoin 7–13 50 mg/kg; ip MWM; social exploration spatial learning deficit; decreased social exploration; increased exploration in OFT M Frankel et al. ( ) Rats Retigabine 7–13 30 mg/kg; ip OFT; EPM; light-dark box; passive avoidance Increased social interaction; decreased exploration in EPM M Frankel et al. ( ) Rats Citalopram 8–21 5–20 mg/kg sc EPM; sex behavior tests Reduced MSB; no deficits or decreased exploration in the EPM M Harris et al. ( ) Rats Citalopram 8–21 22.5 mg/kg sc FST No increased immobility in the FST M Kuramochi and Nakamura ( ) Rats Citalopram 8–21 5 mg/kg sc Locomotor activity; MSB Increased locomotor activity; decreased MSB M Maciag et al. ( ) Rats Citalopram 8–21 10 mg/kg sc Social behavior test increased freezing after tone, diminished novel object exploration, and reduced conspecific interactions in males M, F Simpson et al. ( ) Mice Citalopram 8–21 10 mg/kg sc MSB; OFT; social behavior; defeat stress test Reduced MSB and reduced locomotion in OFT and home cage M Soga et al. ( ) Mice Citalopram 7–20 10–20 mg/kg sc OFT; FST; sucrose preference test; social behavior defeat stress Increased immobility in the FST; altered stress responses; no differences in sucrose preference test or OFT M Kim et al. ( ) Rats Clomipramine 8–21 15 mg/kg sc FST MSB Increased immobility; decreased MSB M Maciag et al. ( ) Rats Clomipramine 8–21 30–60 mg/kg ip MSB Reduced MSB M Vogel et al. ( ) Rats Bupropion 8–21 5 mg/kg sc Novel object test and social interaction test; MSB Reduced novel object exploration in males; reduced conspecific exploration; increased ambulatory activity in females; no MSB deficits M, F Rodriguez-Porcel et al. ( ) Rats Fluoxetine 8–21 5 mg/kg sc Novel object test; social interaction test; MSB Reduced MSB; increased freezing after tone, reduced novel object exploration, and reduced social behavior M, F Rodriguez-Porcel et al. ( ) Rats Desipramine 7–22 5 mg/kg sc Drinking rhythms Lengthening of circadian period M Rosenwasser and Hayes ( ) M male, F female, OFT open field test, FST forced swim test, MSB male sex behavior, REM rapid eye movement, MWM Morris water maze, EPM elevated plus maze, sc subcutaneous, ip intraperitoneal
Analgesics
Exposure to acetaminophen/paracetamol during pregnancy is associated with increases in autism spectrum and ADHD disorders (reviewed in Zucker ). Lifetime cognitive sequelae after acetaminophen, codeine, hydrocodone, hydromorphine, aspirin, meloxicam, naproxine, methadone, and celecoxib administration for pain during breastfeeding have not been established and may be consequential.
Morphine
Morphine exposure via mother’s milk may be substantial (Robieux et al. ) and repeated exposure may result in accumulation due to slower elimination in neonates. Genetic differences in the capacity to convert morphine to the active metabolite morphine-6-glucuronide also may influence risk in children exposed during lactation (Bouwmeester et al. ).
Rodents
Relevant data are lacking, but based on impaired adult cognition in rodents injected neonatally with morphine (Bajic et al. ; McPherson et al. ; Boasen et al. ), adverse effects may well obtain after exposure during lactation.
Anti-migraine drugs
Anti-migraine drugs (AMDs) judged safe during lactation include ibuprofen, sumatriptan, metoprolol, propranolol, verapamil, amitriptyline, escitalopram, paroxetine, sertraline, acetaminophen, caffeine, and metoclopramide; contraindicated drugs include atenolol, nadolol, cinnarizine, flunarizine, ergotamine, methysergide, and pizotifen (Davanzo et al. ). These recommendations are based on case series and anecdotal observations with long-term outcomes on offspring unknown.
Rodents
Relevant data on rodent behavior of offspring exposed to AMDs during lactation are not available.
Marijuana
Cannabis use has increased in child-bearing women in recent years (Calvigioni et al. ). Human studies provide evidence of long-term influences of infant marijuana exposure on cognitive development, but malnutrition associated with maternal cannabis consumption may limit conclusions (Higuera-Matas et al. ). Children exposed to marijuana during gestation have long-term cognitive and attention deficits (e.g., Fried and Watkinson ; reviewed in Campolongo et al. ); comparable data with drug exposure restricted to lactation are unavailable with long-term outcomes unknown (Warner et al. ; Hale and Rowe , p. 147).
Even low to moderate doses of marijuana (THC) during several periods of brain development can profoundly affect brain maturation, potentially leading to long-lasting alterations in cognitive function and emotional behavior (Campolongo et al. ). Cannabinoids that reach the breastfeeding infant are estimated at 0.8% of the mother’s exposure (Metz and Stickrath ), but THC concentrations in human milk may be up to eightfold higher than concurrently measured maternal plasma concentrations (Perez-Reyes and Wall ; Jaques et al. ). The long half-life of THC is accompanied by detectable drug in the breastfeeding infant’s urine for up to 3 weeks. Currently available marijuana is more potent than that used in previous studies, which necessitates reevaluation (Merritt et al. ).
Rodents
No relevant data.
Methadone
Daly et al. ( ) note the relative lack of long-term studies of gestational and lactational exposure to methadone in women, with little follow-up on offspring much beyond about 2 years of age.
Rodents
Approximately 3 mg/kg/day were provided to rat dams during lactation and offspring behavior assessed at 30–120 days of age. Drug treatment increased open-field ambulation for males, and produced higher frequencies of walking and rearing. Gestational exposure did not significantly affect any behavioral measure. The increased impact of lactational exposure may reflect greater sensitivity to the drug, slightly higher doses experienced by lactating than pregnant dams, and the more extended duration of treatment (Daly et al. ). Long-lasting hyperactivity in rats is similar to outcomes in human studies after prenatal exposure (Hutchings ). Among adult female rat offspring exposed to 5 mg/kg methadone, performance in an active avoidance shuttle box was impaired in groups exposed in utero or both during gestation and lactation; exposure only during lactation differed from the controls in the same direction as groups with pre- and postnatal exposure, but the difference was not significant with only six to six to nine rats per group (Zagon et al. ). Offspring of dams administered 9 mg/kg/day during lactation had measurable brain levels of the drug associated with increased behavioral activity at weaning (Kunko et al. ).
Methylphenidate
Methylphenidate (MPH) is used in treatment of ADHD. A meta-analysis revealed only two case studies with very small sample sizes in which MPH was administered during lactation, with no adverse effects reported in infants (Bolea-Alamanac et al. ). Twenty percent of older children treated with MPD manifest anxiety (Kovshoff et al. ). Anxiety and nervousness are both reported to be at least twice as frequent side effects in children with ADHD (NextWave Pharmaceuticals , product information). A meta-analysis, however, suggests that treatment with psychostimulants when compared with placebo significantly reduced the risk of anxiety in children (Coughlin et al. ).
Rodents
Adult offspring of mice treated with 5 mg/kg MPD from days 2 to 7 of lactation spent less time in the light compartment and more time in the dark compartment of the light/dark box, an index of increased anxiety. Rearing frequency decreased in the MPD group. Negative findings are not considered due to sample sizes of six/group (Ponchio et al. ).
Additional drugs lacking relevant human data
Imipramine and clomipramine
Imipramine (IM) and clomipramine (CIM) are drugs whose effect on the nursing infant is unknown and may be of concern (American Academy of Pediatrics ).
Male rat offspring were exposed to 10 mg/kg/day of IM or 11.6 mg/kg/day of CIM during lactation. In adulthood, IM males exhibited decreased locomotor activity; both IM and CIM males defecated more in an open-field arena in adulthood, consistent with increased emotionality (Broitman and Donoso ).
Chlordiazepoxide
Male rats whose mothers were treated with low doses (0.22 and 2.6 mg/kg/day) during lactation displayed normal locomotor activity but were impaired in acquisition of a conditioned avoidance response at 60 days of age (Coen et al. ).
Diazepam
Adult offspring exposed to 10 mg/kg/day diazepam during lactation were deficient in both acquisition and retention of a brightness discrimination task, with persistent hyperactivity in both sexes (Frieder et al. ). Two milligrams per kilogram per day administered to dams during lactation or gestation increased the total number of arm entries by offspring in the plus maze in adulthood compared to control rats, an indicator of decreased anxiety, but only the lactation treatment increased locomotion in an open field test (Silva and Palermo-Neto ).
Bromopride
Bromopride is administered to enhance milk production. Rats treated with 30 mg/kg/day during lactation spent less time immobile than control rats, and 60 mg/kg exposure increased general activity in tests shortly after weaning. Adult males exposed prenatally or pre- and postnatally but not exclusively during lactation were less active in the open field test (Felicio et al. ). In a second study with similar parameters, adult male offspring exposed to the drug only during lactation exhibited reduced active avoidance responses; no drug effect was detected in females, nor were group differences evident in either sex in a modified passive avoidance test (Nasello and Felicio ).
Methamphetamine
Rat dams were exposed to methamphetamine (MA) (5 mg/kg/day) during gestation and/or lactation. Gestational MA exposure did not affect behavior and anxiety, but exposure during lactation induced long-term changes: females in diestrus and adult males exposed to MA via breastfeeding decreased locomotion and exploratory behavior in the OFT and displayed increased anxiety-like behavior in the EPM. Postnatal exposure to MA via breast milk, unlike prenatal exposure, impaired behavior in an unfamiliar environment and induced anxiety-like behavior in adult males and females (Hrubá et al. ), with similar effects on nociception (Hrubá et al. ).
Recommendations
For all drugs under development by pharmaceutical companies, behavioral testing of immature, adolescent, and adult rodents exposed to drugs during lactation should begin before, and continue during phase I clinical trials, with standardized animal models of cognition part of the preclinical test protocol for CNS-active drugs . The translational value of rodent work will be maximized if drugs are administered orally to lactating dams beginning at lactational days 7–10 and extending to weaning. Such studies are currently absent from the literature.
Selection of doses administered to rodent dams should as nearly as possible reflect doses administered to breastfeeding women. The experimental protocol should specify the route of drug administration, control for litter effects, and ensure appropriate sampling from each litter.
Most rodent studies lack a compelling rationale for the choice of drug doses, often selecting doses corresponding to those administered in earlier rodent studies, but not necessarily reflecting doses administered to women. Allometric scaling can facilitate selection of appropriate corresponding doses in rodents and humans (Nair and Jacob ).
Most studies performed in rodent protocols do not conform to guidelines from the OECD for developmental neurotoxicity testing (2007; report#426). Inadequate sample sizes are prone to generate false negatives (type II errors) and spurious conclusions that a drug is free of adverse behavioral effects that might be revealed in an adequately powered study. The most recent OECD guideline (2011; report 443) specifies sample sizes and inclusion of both male and female rodents.
Sufficient numbers of males and females are required to assess sex differences in susceptibility to drug exposure during lactation; sex differences in drug responsiveness are pervasive and well documented (Hughes ; Beery and Zucker ; Becker et al. ; Kokras and Dalla ).
An updated guideline accessible to patients and physicians containing information about drugs administered during lactation would be valuable. The document from the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG guidelines on psychiatric medication use during pregnancy and lactation) is a useful model ( http://www.aafp.org/afp/2008/0915/p772 ). New FDA labeling rules apply to drugs submitted for review after June 2015; information for drugs used during lactation is not currently in drug labels (Riley et al. ) and should be provided where available, including post-marketing findings.
Because so few drugs have both human and rodent data, it is not possible to evaluate whether similar deficits will be detected after lactational drug exposure in rodents and humans. The absence of rodent research on virtually all psychoactive drugs administered to lactating women is a regrettable gap that should be filled by researchers experienced with animal models.
Conclusions
Preclinical rodent research often predicts behavioral deficits in humans (e.g., Zucker ). Despite widespread drug use by breastfeeding women, preclinical data concerning drug effects during lactation are available for very few drugs. Adult behavioral deficits after lactational exposure in rodents included reductions in male sexual behavior and increased anxiety for fluoxetine, hyperactivity for methadone, increased anxiety for methylphenidate, hypoactivity and increased anxiety for methamphetamine, increased emotionality and hypoactivity for imipramine, impaired learning for chlordiazepoxide and diazepam, learning deficits for bromopride, hyperactivity for methadone, and decreased female sexual behavior for sulpiride. Drug exposure restricted to gestation versus lactation often produces different behavioral outcomes.
Related behavioral findings may emerge in human and rodent preadolescents, adolescents, and adults exposed to drugs during breastfeeding. Rodent research has the potential to forecast impairments in breastfed children long before information emerges from post-marketing reports. Animal research is one of the very few avenues for risk mitigation for children exposed to drugs during breastfeeding.