Introduction
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is a feared outcome of pulmonary embolism (PE). It is thought to occur when clot becomes fibrotic and occludes flow leading to progressive dysfunction and remodeling of the pulmonary microvasculature. If left untreated, there is a high risk of pulmonary hypertension, right heart failure and death.
Pulmonary endarterectomy (PEA) has been known as a potentially curative treatment for decades; however, it requires a significant surgical expertise available only at expert centers. Fewer than 60% of patients with CTEPH are able to undergo PEA [ ]. Hence, there is a considerable need for medical and endovascular options to improve morbidity and mortality in nonoperative patients. This review will describe the available pharmacologic agents and the role of balloon pulmonary angioplasty (BPA).
BPA is a percutaneous, endovascular method of improving pulmonary perfusion and pressures that has gained a lot of interest recently as a minimally invasive treatment option in patients either unsuitable for, or refractory to, PEA. Patient selection and close attention to procedural technical specifics are vital to low complication rates and positive patient outcomes and will be reviewed in depth.
Demographics: Pulmonary Hypertension and CTEPH
Pulmonary hypertension is defined by a resting mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP) equal to or greater than 25 mmHg [ ]. Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is one of the leading causes of precapillary pulmonary hypertension [ ]. CTEPH occurs secondary to endothelialized pulmonary thrombi causing small vessel arteriopathy, increased pulmonary vascular resistance, pulmonary hypertension and eventually right heart failure [ ]. Studies published in 2017 report that the annual incidence of CTEPH is 2–5 cases per 100,000 [ , ].
Clinical Diagnosis of CTEPH
Typical initial symptoms of CTEPH are fatigue, atypical angina and exertional dyspnea [ , ]. Risk factors for CTEPH include recurrent venous thromboembolism, antiphospholipid antibody and lupus anticoagulant, inflammatory bowel disease, ventriculoatrial shunt, cardiac pacemaker, prior splenectomy and thyroid hormone replacement, malignancy and blood types other than O [ ].
The diagnosis of CTEPH is based on the following findings obtained after at least 3 months of effective anticoagulation: mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) ≥ 25 mmHg with pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP) ≤ 15 mmHg, mismatched perfusion on lung scan and specific diagnostic signs for CTEPH by CTA, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) or conventional pulmonary angiography (CTPA) [ ]. Echocardiography is used for screening asymptomatic patients and to assign a level of probability for pulmonary hypertension, by the estimate of PAP from continuous wave Doppler measurements. Right heart catheterization is used to confirm the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension and CTEPH and to assess the severity of hemodynamic impairment [ ].
CTEPH is associated with serious consequences if untreated, with a dismal survival rate of 10–20% at 2–3 years [ , ]. Early diagnosis of CTEPH allows for potentially curable therapy of pulmonary endarterectomy in operable candidates [ ].
Imaging Criteria
Ventilation perfusion scintigraphy (VQ) is a first-line imaging test for the evaluation of CTEPH after acute pulmonary embolism [ ], with a sensitivity of 90–100% and specificity of 94–100% [ ], compared to a sensitivity of 51% for CTPA [ ]. Single positron emission computed tomography VQ scintigraphy has a higher sensitivity and specificity in the setting of comorbid conditions [ , ].
Catheter pulmonary angiography is the current gold standard for assessment of pulmonary vessels. Imaging findings include pulmonary arterial pouching, webs or bands, intimal irregularities, vascular narrowing and obstruction (Figs. 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 ) [ ]. Right heart catheterization can be used for pulmonary hypertension and CTEPH [ ] to measure right atrial pressure, PAP, cardiac output (CO), mixed venous saturation and calculate pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR). CO and PVR have demonstrated prognostic value for outcomes of post-pulmonary endarterectomy [ ]. Fig. 1 Seventy-six-year-old female with CTEPH. Contrast-enhanced CT. A Axial view demonstrates an enlarged main pulmonary artery measuring 35 mm (red line) without central thrombus. B Multiple bronchial artery collaterals (green arrow). C , D Axial and coronal views demonstrating multiple atrophic and nonenhancing segmental and subsegmental branches of the right upper lobe (yellow arrows). E Multifocal mosaic oligemia. F Tortuosity and dilatation of the normally enhancing segmental branches of the left lower lobe (blue arrows) Fig. 2 Seventy-one-year-old male with CTEPH. Contrast-enhanced CT. A Axial view demonstrates enlarged main pulmonary artery measuring 56 mm (red line) without central embolus. B Maximum intensity projection images in coronal view demonstrating eccentric filling defects in the lobar pulmonary arteries (yellow arrow). C Occlusion of right middle lobe segmental pulmonary arteries (green arrow). Digital subtraction angiography with selective contrast injection into the left main pulmonary artery. D , F Demonstrate a dilated left main pulmonary artery, widely patent segmental arteries in the left upper lobe, proximal occlusion of the segmental arteries of the lingula, pruning of all segmental arteries in the left lower lobe. Selective contrast injection into the right main pulmonary artery. E , G Demonstrate a dilated right main pulmonary artery, widely patent right upper lobe segmental arteries, dilated interlobar artery and pruning of all right middle lobe and lower lobe pulmonary arteries Fig. 3 Forty-one-year-old female with a history of CTEPH following deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolus in 2011 without clear etiology. A – C There is a large filling defect in the left lower lobe pulmonary artery consistent with central occlusive thrombus, a significant decrease in size of lobar and segmental pulmonary arteries and sequelae of left lower lobe infarction. Given surgically accessible lesion without a significant evidence of distal thrombo-occlusive lesions, patient subsequently underwent PEA. Postoperative course was complicated by pericardial effusion requiring pericardial window on postoperative day 10 and diaphragmatic paralysis which improved over the course of several weeks Fig. 4 Seventy-one-year-old female with distal CTEPH. A CECT with massively dilated central pulmonary arteries without significant thromboembolic lesions. B Mosaic perfusion, peripheral irregular, linear-shaped densities, likely sequelae of infarct (arrows). C Intraluminal fibrous webs/bands (arrow) and eccentric organized thrombi (arrowhead). D Eccentric organized thrombi, partial occlusions, stenosis and intraluminal fibrous webs and bands. E , F Pre-angioplasty pulmonary angiograms. G , H Post- and intraballoon angioplasty with improved flow. I Optical coherence tomography (OCT) image of an intraluminal web in a segmental artery of the left lower lobe. J OCT image of a normal appearing segment of a left lower lobe pulmonary artery Fig. 5 Thirty-six-year-old female with distal CTEPH. A CECT demonstrating vascular disproportion, eccentric thrombi and multiple stenoses, intraluminal rings and webs. En-face view of eccentric thromboembolus (arrow). A – D Pre-, intra- and post-balloon dilatation of left lower lobe segmental artery with slightly improved flow. E – L Pre-, intra- and post-balloon dilatation of two right upper lobe segmental arteries with slightly improved flow
CT pulmonary angiography is the initial diagnostic test of choice for acute pulmonary embolism; however, it is less established for the diagnosis of CTEPH given the lower sensitivity compared to VQ scintigraphy [ ]. Imaging findings include enlarged central pulmonary arteries, diminutive peripheral vessels, mosaic attenuation of the lung parenchyma [ ]. Less specific findings include band atelectasis, wedge-shaped infarcts, peripheral linear opacities and cavitary lesions. Cross-sectional bronchial artery area correlates with central thromboembolic disease extent and severity of bronchopulmonary shunting [ , ], and bronchial artery dilatation corresponds to decreased postoperative mortality and pulmonary vascular resistance after pulmonary endarterectomy [ ].
Medical Management
Anticoagulation is associated with a decreased risk of recurrent venous thromboembolism in patients with unprovoked or idiopathic pulmonary embolism [ ]. However, life-long anticoagulation and direct oral anticoagulants have not been studied in detail for CTEPH. Vasodilators may be useful for persistent CTEPH after pulmonary endarterectomy and inoperable CTEPH as they lower the PVR and mPAP, leading to an increase in exercise capacity and oxygenation.
Soluble guanylate cyclase stimulants (e.g., Riociguat) are effective in CTEPH for inoperable candidates and those with residual pulmonary hypertension after pulmonary endarterectomy [ ] with improvements in 6-min walk distance (6MWD), PVR, World Health Organization (WHO) functional class and N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide [ ] up to 2 years. Riociguat is approved for use in Europe.
Endothelin receptor antagonists (e.g., bosentan and ambrisentan) are currently approved for use in Europe in the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension [ ]. Oral bosentan therapy resulted in decreased pulmonary vascular resistance and improvement in cardiac index but not exercise capacity [ ]. For inoperable patients with CTEPH, bosentan is associated with improved baseline exercise capacity by the 6MWD, decreased mPAP and increased cardiac index [ ].
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors (e.g., sildenafil, tadalafil) are approved for use in Europe and are associated with an improved WHO functional class and decreased pulmonary vascular resistance, but no change in exercise capacity at 12 weeks [ ]. Over 12 months, sildenafil was associated with improved 6MWD, quality of life score, cardiac index, pulmonary vascular resistance and N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide.
Prostanoids (e.g., epoprostenol, treprostinil, iloprost) in patients with inoperable CTEPH have been associated with improved pulmonary hemodynamics, laboratory markers, functional capacity and long-term survival [ , , ].
Surgical Treatment
The gold standard treatment for CTEPH is pulmonary thromboendarterectomy [ ]. Patients with lesions in the main and lobar branch vessels of the pulmonary artery should undergo PEA rather than BPA as organized thrombi should be removed whenever accessible to address the underlying disease process [ , ], whereas disease in the segmental and subsegmental pulmonary arteries is often surgically inaccessible. Exclusion criteria for PEA include small vessel disease with disproportionately elevated pulmonary vascular resistance, expected postoperative pulmonary vascular resistance reduction of less than 50% and significant perioperative risks. Reduced effectiveness of PEA may be seen in patients with severe restrictive or obstructive lung disease.
There are two major potential complications from PEA: pulmonary artery steal syndrome and reperfusion pulmonary edema. Pulmonary artery steal syndrome can occur in up to 70% of patients undergoing endarterectomy and signifies redistribution of blood flow to endarterectomized segments [ ], and reperfusion pulmonary edema can occur in up to 30% of patients with fluid collection in areas of the lung where pulmonary thrombus was removed [ ]. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation may be required if patients succumb to pulmonary artery steal syndrome and reperfusion pulmonary edema [ , ]. Later adverse effects include recurrent pulmonary hypertension and residual elevation in mPAP; the former can occur in between 5 and 35% of patients after pulmonary thromboendarterectomy [ , ]. Poor surgical outcomes are associated with decompensated heart failure [ ] and advanced age > 70 years [ ].
Long-term survival for PEA at 3–5 years is roughly 90% for operable candidates compared to 70% for nonoperable candidates [ , , ], and the use of medical therapy does not improve survival rates. In one registry, the in-hospital mortality rate after PEA was reported at 4.7% and a 1-year mortality of 7%. Lower mortality rates are attributed to increased surgical experience, improved patient selection and inclusion of newly diagnosed patients in the registry. Finally, PEA is associated with improved 6MWD and New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class [ ].
Balloon Pulmonary Angioplasty
Rationale and History
Balloon pulmonary angioplasty (BPA) was first described in 2001 [ ] in patients who were not candidates for PEA due to distal branch pulmonary artery thromboembolic lesions or severe medical comorbidities. The patients were found to have decreases in right ventricular systolic pressure, mPAP and right ventricular/systemic pressure ratios overall. Following the procedure, average NYHA class and 6MWD improved. However, complications also occurred. One patient required coil embolization following a lobar pulmonary artery perforation, and 11 out of 18 patients developed reperfusion pulmonary edema. One patient with segmental pulmonary edema expired 1 week after BPA despite mechanical ventilatory support and inhaled nitric oxide. The high complication rate led to poor uptake of the procedure; however, since then refinements in technique with limits in number of lesions treated per session, use of pressure wire and adjunctive pre- and intraprocedural imaging modalities to evaluate lesions have been described.
Patient and Lesion Selection
BPA is reserved for patients who are unable to undergo surgical pulmonary embolectomy due to inaccessible lesion(s), medical comorbidities, aversion to surgical treatment [ , ] and those who have failed to respond to PEA. In one large-scale international registry, 36% of patients with CTEPH were considered inoperable [ ] (Table 1 ). As a result, there remains a need for nonsurgical treatment alternatives. Table 1 Reported outcomes and complications after balloon pulmonary angioplasty (BPA) in patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) First author, Journal, Year, n Inclusion criteria (in CTEPH patients) # Procedures and follow-up Outcomes Complications Feinstein, Circulation, 2001 [ ] 18 Distal branch pulmonary obstructions No proximal branch lesions or severe medical comorbidities Average of 2.6 procedures and 6 dilatations with a mean follow-up of 35.9 months mPAP 43 → 33.7 RVP 74 → 58 CI 2.0 → 2.1 TPR 22 → 17 NYHA 3.3 → 1.8 6MWD 209 → 497 RPE: 11 patients (3 requiring mechanical ventilation, 1 death due to right ventricular failure on POD 7) PAI: 1 PAI requiring coil embolization Other: 3 femoral pseudoaneurysms, 1 death due to recurrent pneumonia Kataoka, Circ Cardiovasc Interv, 2012 [ ] 29 Lesions in the lobar, segmental and subsegmental branches Poor candidates for PEA due to high age/poor physical condition 3 Patients with residual pulmonary hypertension following PEA Following an average of 1.8 procedures and total target vessels of 6.5 per patient with a mean follow-up of 6 months after last procedure mPAP 41.8 → 40.8 mRAP 5.2 → 5.0 CO 3.8 → 3.9 RPE: 27/51 sessions PAI: 1 dissection, 1 death on POD 2 due to wiring perforation Sugimura, Circulation J, 2012 [ ] 12 12 Distal-type CTEPH (2 with residual PH post-PEA) Following an average of 5 procedures for 14 lesions with a mean follow-up of 12 months mPAP 43.2 → 24.8 RAP 6 → 3.3 CI 2.66 → 2.79 PVR 672 → 310 (dyne s/cm 5 ) BNP 78 → 16 6MWD 340 → 441 Mild to moderate hemoptysis in 6 patients which was managed with supplemental O2 or NPPV Mizoguchi, Circ Cardiovasc Interv, 2012 [ ] 68 Inoperable CTEPH (surgical inaccessibility, age or comorbidities) NYHA class 3 or 4 Following an average of 4 sessions and 3 dilatations per session with mean follow-up of 2.2 years after final BPA mPAP 45.4 → 24 RAP 8.1 → 1.9 CI 2.2 → 3.2 PVR 942 → 327 (dyne s/cm 5 ) BNP 330 → 35 (pg/mL) O2 inhalation 3.0 → 1.3 (L/min) 6MWD 296 → 368 RPE: 221 out of 255 sessions PAI: 5 out of 255 sessions Other: 1 death due to pneumonia Andreassen, Heart, 2013 [ ] 20 16 Patients with surgically inaccessible obstructions 1 Patient post-PEA 3 Patients who rejected surgery 2 Patients with severe comorbidities Following an average of 3.7 procedures and 18.6 total dilatations per patient with a mean follow-up of 51 months mPAP 45 → 33 mRAP 6 → 4 CI 2.3 → 2.8 PVR 8.8 → 5.9 (wood units) NT-proBNP 194 → 90 (pmol/L) RPE: 7 patients Other: 1 Death due to RHF 1 Death due to PE Inami, JACC: Cardiovasc Interv, 2013 [ ] 54 CTEPH with: mPAP > 30 mmHg PVR > 3.75 Wood units (300 dynes/s/cm −5 ) NYHA > 2 Following an average of 2.6 procedures per patient with a median observation period (first procedure to last follow-up) of 6.4 months mPAP 43 → 23 mRAP 5.7 → 3 CI 2.5 → 3 PVR 9.2 → 4 (Wood) BNP 126 → 30 (pg/mL) 6MWD 340 → 400 RPE: 53 PAI: 1 death due to exacerbation of RHF. 2 dissections which were managed conservatively. 4 extravascular leaks, treated with prolonged low-pressure dilatation out of 140 sessions Yanagisawa, Int J Cardiology, 2014 [ ] 70 CTEPH with: mPAP > 30 mmHg PVR > 3.75 Wood units NYHA > 2 wished to undergo PTPA rather than PEA post-PEA Values below represent amount of change pre vs. post-BPA PAI: 1 death Younger ( n = 39, < 65 years of age) Elderly ( n = 31, ≥ 65 years of age) mRAP 3.8 mPAP 26 BNP CO 5 PVR 3.8 6MWD 441 mRAP 3.6 mPAP 24 BNP 201 CO 4.6 PVR 3.9 6MWD 409 Shimura, Int J Cardiology, 2015 [ ] 9 All undergone previous PEA with residual/recurrent pulmonary hypertension Pre-PTPA vs post-PTPA BNP 49.2 → 51.1 mPAP 43 → 26 CO 3.9 → 4.2 PVR 8.1 → 4.2 *pre-PTPA values reflect changes following PEA RPE: 1, which required NPPV PAI: 1, managed with covered stent placement out of 44 sessions Roik, Int J Cardiology, 2015 [ ] 11 CTEPH with: mPAP > 30 At least 1 segmental perfusion defect NYHA > 2 Following an average of 3 session and 6 vessels treated per patient with median follow-up of 5 months mPAP 40 → 34.5 CI 2.17 → 2.88 PVR 9.06 → 4.75 (Wood units) 6MWD 304 → 384 NT-proBNP (pg/mL) 1248 → 730 RPE: 2 patients, requiring O2 via nasal cannula Other: 1 patient with atrial fibrillation that was successfully treated Velázquez, Rev Esp Cardiol, 2015 [ ] 7 CTEPH with: NYHA 3–4 despite triple combination medical therapy. Following an average of 3.1 procedures per patient with 2.4 segments and 1.2 lobes mPAP 56 → 36 CI 2.3 → 2.6 PVR 11.8 → 6.1 (Wood units) NT-pro-BNP (pg/dL) 1366 → 646 per procedure and a mean follow-up of 6 months RPE: 2 patients, 1 death due to brain hemorrhage while on vaECMO Tatebe, Circ J, 2016 [ ] 55 Symptomatic and inoperable CTEPH Following an average 3.5 sessions per patient with a mean follow-up period of 474 days mPAP 35 → 24 mRAP 6 → 5 CI 2.6 → 2.7 PVR 482 → 255 (dyne s cm −5 ) BNP 252 → 34 (pg/mL) 6MWD 408 → 482 No section on complications Ogo, Eur J Radiology, 2016 [ ] 80 Inoperable CTEPH Residual PH after PEA Following an average of 4.8 sessions per patient with a mean follow-up of 13.6 months Baseline → 3 months after BPA → 1 year after BPA mPAP 42 → 25 → 23 mRAP 3.9 → 2.4 → 2.0 CI 2.3 → 2.6 → 2.6 PVR 11 → 5.1 → 4.7 (Wood units) BNP 227 → 48 → 28 (pg/mL) 6MWD 372 → 470 → 495 RPE: 18 (2 requiring mechanical ventilation) PAI: 29 out of 385 sessions Aoki, Eur Heart J, 2017 [ ] 84 Inoperable CTEPH Following an average of 2.5 segments treated per session with a mean follow-up of 43 months Pre BPA → Post-BPA (~ 3 mo post) mPAP 38 → 25 CI 2.7 → 2.5 PVR 7.3 → 3.8 (Wood units) BNP 55.8 → 25 (pg/dL) 6MWD 380 → 486 Dissection 30 Hemoptysis 60 Pulmonary edema 4 NPPV use 33 Intubation 1 Death 0 out of 424 sessions Olsson, Eur Resp J, 2017 [ ] 56 Inoperable CTEPH (excluded combined PEA + BPA treatments) Following a median of 5 interventions per patient and 2 vessels targeted per session with a median observation period of 13.8 weeks Baseline → Week 24 mPAP 40 → 33 mRAP 8 → 6 CI 2.4 → 2.5 PVR 591 → 440 (dyne s cm −5 ) NT-proBNP 504 → 242 6MWD 358 → 391 RPE: 2 PAI: 20 out of 266 sessions
Roughly 27% of patients who undergo PEA suffer from recurrent or residual pulmonary hypertension following treatment [ , ]. Recurrent or residual pulmonary hypertension after PEA is defined as: WHO functional class ≥ III after conventional therapy, mean PAP ≥ 25 mm Hg or PVR ≥ 300 dyn s cm −5 [ ] more than 3 months after PEA. These patients may benefit from BPA as improvements in systolic PAP, mean PAP and PVR were reported in a small case series [ ].
While higher complication rates are seen in cases of severe pulmonary hypertension, BPA should still be considered in medically refractory cases given the poor prognosis if left untreated [ ]. Elderly patients, defined as those greater than 65 years of age, appear to see similar hemodynamic improvements as younger patients and are not at higher risk of technical failure or complications [ ].
Likewise reduced renal function is not a contraindication for BPA. One study in patients with low estimated glomerular filtration rates (eGFR, < 57 mL/min/1.73 m2) found improvements in eGFR following BPA [ ]. By improving hemodynamics, BPA may facilitate improved renal perfusion and decrease venous congestion. The use of gadolinium-based contrast media has been described in a case report and may be considered in severe cases of contrast allergy [ ]. Intravenous use of CO2 for pulmonary arteriography has not been well described in the literature and is relatively contraindicated in patients with pulmonary hypertension given limited baseline oxygen delivery and cardiopulmonary reserve [ , ].
Studies have demonstrated improved lesion selection with various adjunctive intraprocedural characterization modalities, including pressure wire measurements [ ], intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) [ ], optical coherence tomography (OCT) [ , , , ] and cone-beam computed tomography [ ]. Ratios of pressures proximal and distal to the target lesions have been shown to strongly correlate with pulmonary flow grade, which can also be used to determine the suitability of a lesion to treatment and decrease risk of reperfusion edema [ , ]. IVUS and OCT may be used to better evaluate lesions to confirm the presence of CTEPH-related intraluminal changes and determine optimal balloon sizing and adequacy of treatment. Ring-like and web lesions on IVUS and OCT were associated with near-complete recanalization and low perforation rates, whereas total occlusions were recanalized in roughly half of cases and tortuous lesions were associated with higher risk of arterial injury [ , ].
Treatment Planning
Pre-procedural planning entails comprehensive assessment of the patient’s hemodynamic capacity and imaging. Lower lobe lesions are generally targeted for treatment as there tends to be greater pulmonary arterial blood flow in the dependent portions of the lung. Optimization of baseline hemodynamic function should be attempted with medical therapy as patients will need to tolerate breath holds and transient decreases in oxygen delivery during angioplasty. Patients are maintained on therapeutic anticoagulation prior to and during BPA, most commonly with a direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) or warfarin and a target international normalized ratio (INR) of 2–3.5.
Balloon Pulmonary Angioplasty Technique
We perform balloon pulmonary angioplasty with a standard angiography suite layout and a ceiling-mounted radiation shield to limit operator exposure, which can be considerable. Patients are given conscious sedation, usually with appropriate doses of midazolam and fentanyl, and undergo standard physiologic monitoring with heart rate, blood pressure and oxygen saturation with the assistance of anesthesia staff who are present for all cases. Access is usually obtained via a common femoral venous approach. While some have reported success with a right internal jugular venous approach, we have found easier catheter manipulation and lower operator radiation exposure with a femoral approach. Following venous access, an 8-French (Fr) 65-cm Destination guiding sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) is advanced to the level of the main pulmonary artery and the right or left pulmonary artery selected with a 6-Fr guiding catheter (Mach 1, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, Massachusetts USA) and advanced to the origin of the segmental vessels selected for treatment (Fig. 3 ). A 185-cm 0.014″ V14 guidewire (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) and 2 mm × 2 cm Coyote monorail balloon dilatation catheter (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) are inserted into the guiding catheter. Once the target vessel is reached, a guiding catheter should be placed as close to the CTEPH lesion as possible. An 0.014″ guidewire should be supported with a balloon catheter roughly 1–2 cm behind the wire tip. Lesions are predilated with 2 mm × 2 cm balloon dilatation catheter, allowing the operator to select an appropriately sized balloon. Angioplasty is performed with the aim of dilating the lesion to 90% of the vessel diameter proximal or distal to the lesion, whichever is smaller, and the balloon is left in situ for up to 30 s (Figs. 4 , 5 ). A repeat selective pulmonary angiogram is performed to assess change in lesion caliber and the presence of vascular injury. In the event that the lesion caliber does not respond adequately, repeat angioplasty may be performed. Certain lesions may require two separate sessions, the first to break up the fibrin cap and the second for durable angioplasty [ ]. In the event of chronic total occlusions, a retrograde approach via collaterals may be attempted, although this may be technically challenging [ ].
Each BPA session is generally limited to 60 min of fluoroscopy time and 250 cc of iodinated contrast volume (Ultravist 300, Bayer, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA). Patients with mPAPs of greater than 50 mmHg will have 1–2 lesions treated, those with mPAPs between 40 and 50 mmHg, 3–5 lesions and in cases of mPAPs less than 40 mmHg, 5–8 lesions. The rationale for treatment over multiple sessions is to decrease the incidence of reperfusion edema by limiting target lesions to a single lobe at a time. Whereas pulmonary arterial pressures in PEA-treated lung segments immediately decrease due to simultaneous treatment of the entire field, pressures in BPA-treated segments tend to remain high and susceptible to edema due to the relatively smaller treatment field allowed by sequential target vessel balloon dilatation. Once the PA pressures have been reduced below a mean of 40 mmHg and if there is symptomatic relief, then further treatments are deferred. Exact end points for the treatment protocols are still being evaluated.
Technical challenges include inferior vena cava (IVC) obstruction due to filter placement or thrombus formation which may require either conversion to a jugular approach or filter retrieval, recanalization and possible stenting. Right heart enlargement may cause anatomical distortion and difficulty with right ventricular outflow tract access. In this event, a 7-Fr balloon wedge catheter (Arrow, Teleflex, Morrisville, NC, USA) or a 5-Fr pigtail catheter may be placed immediately superior to the inferior cavoatrial junction and then directed toward the expected location of the tricuspid valve. Difficulty with cannulating the right and left pulmonary arteries can be overcome by advancing the 7-Fr sheath into the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) or main pulmonary artery (MPA) and using a pigtail catheter to direct an 0.035″ angled glidewire (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). The 7-Fr sheath can then be advanced into the left or right pulmonary arteries.
Post-Procedural Care
Patients are generally admitted overnight and monitored in a medical intensive care unit for 48 h after the initial session and 24 h after subsequent sessions. A chest radiograph is performed a few hours and the morning after the procedure to assess for lung injury. A noncontrast CT of the chest is obtained in the event of new symptoms or abnormal CXR. If a patient develops hypoxemia, he/she is started on noninvasive positive pressure ventilation and, depending on response, may receive escalated care [ ]. Most patients are discharged the day after subsequent BPA sessions with specific return precautions in the event of decompensation related to delayed onset lung injury [ ].
Follow-up outpatient clinical assessment is performed within 1 month of discharge. Visits involve a focused interview, cardiopulmonary examination and 6MWD test. Additional treatment sessions are scheduled 1–2 months apart. Following completion of treatment course, patients are seen in clinic at 3, 6 and 12 months and then yearly with a VQ scan, echocardiogram and 6MWD test. Signs of clinical deterioration or worsening pulmonary hypertension on echocardiography will prompt a repeat right heart catheterization.
Evidence for Efficacy
BPA improves pulmonary hemodynamics, as measured by mPAP, cardiac index (CI), PVR, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), echocardiographic, magnetic resonance imaging and metrics of functional capacity, such as home O2 requirement, NYHA/WHO functional class and 6MWD [ , , , , , ]. BPA also was associated with improved renal function, blood sugar control and nutritional status [ , ]. These findings persisted after BPA with stable findings at 6 months or greater in various populations [ , , , , ]. Patients with intraprocedural parameters suggestive of poor outcome, such as elevated diastolic pulmonary arterial pressure and diastolic pressure gradient, were found to have a higher incidence of residual pulmonary hypertension. However, these patients still experienced improvements in hemodynamic markers (WHO functional class, BNP, 6MWD) without an increased complication rate [ ]. Results of studies comparing hemodynamic improvement after PEA and BPA are mixed. One study described similar improvements in mean PAP, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and CO, while another demonstrated more dramatic reductions in PAP in PEA versus BPA [ , ].
Complications of BPA mostly involve vascular injury and reperfusion pulmonary edema which may manifest immediately or several days post-procedure. Ring and web lesions tend to be the safest, whereas tortuous lesions were associated with higher rates of complications [ ]. Pulmonary artery injury occurred in 10% of cases, of which roughly 80% required balloon sealing, embolization or insertion of covered stents [ , ]. Reperfusion edema is seen in up to half of cases and will present as cough, hemoptysis and/or hypoxia. The use of pressure wire guidance and treatment of lesions based on a scoring index (PEPSI) comprised of the sum total change of pulmonary flow grade multiplied by the baseline PVR [Wood units] scores has been shown to minimize the rate of reperfusion edema and vessel injury [ , , ]. Mortality occurring within 30 days post-procedure is most commonly related to acute reperfusion pulmonary edema, right heart failure and pulmonary arterial injury. Between 2001 and 2016, there have been 14 periprocedural deaths reported in the literature out of 859 treated patients, representing a 1.6% rate of mortality overall [ , , , , , ]. There is good long-term survival with studies reporting 1–4-year survival ranging from 96.8–100 to 85%, respectively [ , , , , , , ], comparable to those described for PEA [ ].
Conclusion
PEA remains the gold standard for management of CTEPH. There is plentiful evidence for the efficacy, durability and standardization of the procedure, and it is the only treatment modality that may be pursued with curative intent. As such all patients who can undergo PEA should be offered it. However, there are substantial populations of CTEPH patients for whom PEA is either not available, not desired, or carries excessive morbidity and mortality. In these carefully selected patients, BPA can offer the potential for significant hemodynamic, functional and survival benefit. The endovascular techniques have evolved from pulmonary embolism and coronary/peripheral atherosclerotic disease to specifically tackle the problems of chronic thrombosis, webs, occlusions, recanalization and angioplasty needed to successfully perform this challenging procedure. Future refinements in technique, patient selection and targeted medical management will determine the protocols for BPA and allow improvements in both short- and long-term outcomes.