Introduction
Overwhelming evidence has come to light regarding the benefit of endovascular mechanical thrombectomy (MT) [ , , , , ] in the treatment of patients suffering from stroke due to an emergent large vessel occlusion (LVO) of the intracranial vasculature. Accordingly, increasing scientific effort has been made to understand what technical and procedural factors influence good and excellent clinical outcomes. It is beyond dispute that successful and at best, complete reperfusion is a key point to achieve good neurological outcome [ , , ]. Nevertheless, there is a certain number of patients who benefit less than others or not at all (“futile” recanalizations), despite technically successful procedures and reasonable times from symptom onset to recanalization [ , , ]. Different reasons have been discussed as responsible for good clinical outcome apart from technical and procedural parameters [ ]. Besides a high pre-interventional Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score (ASPECTS), a good collateral status was identified as another important determinant of good outcome [ , , , , , , , , ]. In addition to arterial blood pressure prior to revascularization [ ], individual micro- and macrovascular anatomy influences patients’ collateralization.
In contrast to secondary pathways of collateralization such as external to internal carotid connections as well as pial- and leptomeningeal branches that can be recruited secondary to acute vessel occlusions, the circle of Willis can be regarded as a primary pathway of collateralization providing blood flow in preexisting macrovascular structures that play an important role in the case of an LVO. So far, the wide anatomical variations in the circle of Willis have not been well studied in the context of endovascular treatment effects in patients suffering from LVO, although individual anatomy is suspected to be of great importance for patients suffering from LVO [ , ]. For this reason, we aimed to analyze whether the presence of an ipsilateral posterior communicating artery (PComA) influences the technical and/or the clinical outcome of patients suffering from acute occlusions of the middle cerebral artery (MCA). This anatomical difference has not been described before in this context.
Materials and Methods
For the present study, we performed a retrospective analysis of a prospectively collected database including all consecutive stroke patients treated by endovascular measures. We identified all patients treated for acute MCA occlusion between January 1, 2015, and July 31, 2017. Written consent was waived by the institutional review board, because of the retrospective design of the present study.
Intervention
Patients were eligible for endovascular thrombectomy if computed tomography angiography (CTA) confirmed LVO of the M1 segment of the middle cerebral artery and ASPECTS > 5. Only patients with substantial neurological deficits were eligible (National Institute of Health Stroke Scale, NIHSS > 5). No age or perfusion selection was applied. Patients with stenosis of the internal carotid artery (ICA) or underlying stenosis of the MCA were not included. Groin puncture was achieved within 6 h after symptom onset or the last time the patient was known to be well. After establishing a femoral artery access, an 8F guide catheter (Vista bright tip, Cordis/Neuron MAX 088, Penumbra) was navigated into the ICA.
A large bore aspiration catheter was introduced into the distal ICA or MCA (5 MAX, Penumbra/ACE 64, Penumbra/ACE 68, Penumbra/SOFIA, MicroVention/Catalyst 6, Stryker). Stent retriever maneuvers were performed in all cases (pREset, Phenox/Trevo XP ProVue, Stryker/Solitaire 2, Medtronic). Therefore, the device was introduced via a microcatheter (Trevo 18, Stryker) and deployed. Continuous aspiration during the maneuver was applied to the aspiration catheter via an electrical pump (Pump MAX, Penumbra).
Image Analysis
All digital subtraction angiography (DSA) series were analyzed regarding the presence of an ipsilateral PComA (Fig. 1 ). This analysis was performed by two board-certified neurointerventionalists in consensus reading (BF, CM) who were blinded to the clinical outcome. Reperfusion was graded using the modified Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction (mTICI) [ ] scale by the same readers. Successful reperfusion was defined as mTICI 2b/3. Final infarct volume was analyzed by means of the post-interventional diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) MRI, acquired 3–5 days after MT. The stroke volume was semiautomatically calculated using ITK-SNAP [ ] by a single reader (BF), blinded to the anatomical situation. Pre-interventional CT perfusion (CTP) studies were analyzed regarding the volume of the Penumbra. CTP imaging was analyzed fully automatically using RAPID (iSchemaView, Menlo Park, CA, USA). Penumbra was defined as a critically hypo-perfused tissue with Tmax > 6 s. Fig. 1 Two exemplary cases illustrating the different anatomical variants of an absent ( A , B ) and a present posterior communicating artery ( C , D )
Outcome Analysis
The neurological deficits prior to the intervention were evaluated using the NIHSS and the modified Rankin Scale (mRS) by experienced stroke neurologists. Additionally, the mRS was assessed again 90 days after MT (mRS90). “Good clinical outcome” was defined as mRS90 0-2. “Excellent clinical outcome” was defined as mRS90 0-1.
Statistical Analysis
Baseline, technical and outcome parameters between both groups were compared using Mann–Whitney U test or Fisher’s exact test depending on the type of variables analyzed. To adjust for potential confounders, a multivariate logistic regression model was applied to assess the independence of associations. The following prespecified factors were included in a model with excellent clinical outcome as dependent variable: (1) age, (2) the presence of an ipsilateral PComA, (3) initial NIHSS, (4) pretreatment with i.v. tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), (5) anesthesia type, (6) successful recanalization and (7) period from symptom onset to groin puncture. Results derived from logistic regression analysis are shown as adjusted Odds Ratio (aOR) and respective 95% confidence interval (95% CI).
Data are generally displayed as n (%) or median, if not indicated otherwise. Statistical significance was assumed at p < 0.05.
Results
Our database analysis returned 101 patients with M1 occlusions who had undergone MT (60 patients were identified as missing an ipsilateral PComA, 41 patients had a clearly visible PComA). Both groups were well balanced regarding their baseline characteristics (Table 1 ). There were no cases of absent ipsilateral A1 segments of the anterior cerebral artery in both groups. The rates of successful recanalization defined as mTICI 2b/3 were similar in both groups (Table 2 ). In the analysis of good clinical outcome, the group with a PComA present showed a clear trend toward a higher rate of good clinical outcome (mRS 0-2 after 90 days, Fig. 2 ). There was a higher rate of patients with excellent clinical outcome (defined as a mRS 0-1 after 90 days) compared with the group with a missing PComA (51 vs. 28%, p = 0.02, Fig. 2 ). After correction for potential confounders, the presence of a PComA was independently associated with the rate of excellent clinical outcome (aOR 3.9, 95% CI 1.2–9.8; p = 0.021). Patients with a present PComA also had significantly lower final infarct volumes (38 ± 8 cm 3 vs. 78 ± 13 cm 3 , p = 0.032). No difference was found regarding the tissue at risk in perfusion CT prior to intervention (Table 1 ). Table 1 Patient characteristics PComA absent n = 60 PComA present n = 41 p value % Female 57% 54% 0.768 Age 74 ± 13 72 ± 14 0.396 % Wake-up 35% 24% 0.396 NIHSS on admission 14 (9–18) 14 (11–17) 0.539 mRS on admission 5 (4–5) 5 (4–5) 0.785 Penumbra at initial CT perfusion (ml) 70.0 92.2 0.452 i.v. tPA 57% 58% 0.929 Symptom onset to groin puncture 206 ± 74 min 181 ± 71 min 0.160 PComA posterior communicating artery, NIHSS National Institute of Health Stroke Scale, mRS modified Rankin Scale, tPA tissue plasminogen activator Table 2 Procedure and clinical outcome PComA absent n = 60 PComA present n = 41 p value Anesthesia 47% GA 39% GA 0.857 Groin puncture to recanalization 48 ± 39 min 54 ± 51 min 0.506 Final mTICI 0.555 0 12% 2% 1 0% 0% 2a 3% 10% 2b 33% 39% 3 52% 49% Successful recanalization (mTICI 2b/3) 85% 88% 0.692 Infarct volume 78 ± 13 cm 3 38 ± 8 cm 3 0.032 Good clinical outcome (mRS 90d 0-2) 43% 56% 0.211 Excellent clinical outcome (mRS 90d 0-1) 28% 51% 0.02 Bold values indicate statistical significance PComA posterior communicating artery, GA general anesthesia, mTICI modified Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction Score, mRS 90d modified Rankin Scale 90 days after stroke Fig. 2 Distribution of clinical outcome 90 days after stroke according to the modified Rankin Scale (mRS 90d) between patients with a present and an absent PComA. There is a trend toward better outcome in patients with a present PComA ( p = 0.211). Regarding excellent clinical outcome (defined as a mRS 0-1), there is a significant difference between the two groups (51 vs. 28%, p = 0.02). PComA, posterior communicating artery
Discussion
The main finding of our study is that the presence of an ipsilateral PComA was independently associated with the rate of excellent clinical outcome. This effect is not self-explanatory, and our attempts at explanation are hypothetical in nature. It is certain that collateral status is one of the most important influencing factors for good and excellent clinical outcomes [ , , , , , , , , ]. Good collateral status might even be of greater relevance than time from symptom onset until recanalization. Therefore, the fundamental question is what factors influence collateral status in cases of acute MCA occlusions without preexisting stenosis. Patients with preexisting stenosis must be regarded as a completely different entity regarding collaterals because in such cases collateral vessels are induced secondary to chronic diminishment of cerebral blood flow in the downstream vascular territory [ , , , ].
In the case of an acute occlusion of the MCA, there are different hemodynamic reactions ongoing, aiming at the preservation of the brain tissue by recruitment of collateral blood flow to the tissue at risk. As secondary pathways of collateralization, pial- and leptomeningeal branches are immediately recruited secondary to the acute vessel occlusion. The filling of such small vessels and accordingly the effectivity of collateralization is in a large part dependent on the filling pressure. This filling pressure is basically dependent on two regulating variables: the arterial pressure that is provided via the primary collateral vessels and the cross-sectional area of all arterial vessels that supply the collateral vessels [ ]. In the case of an acute M1 occlusion in the presence of a PComA, the filling pressure of the primary collateral vessels of the posterior cerebral artery is increased abruptly when the M1 is blocked by the thrombus as shown in the supplemental materials. This increase is attributed to the fact that there is no pressure decrease as a result of the outflow into the MCA (in the case of a proximal and complete M1 occlusion), while the PComA is still apparent and so “overloaded” by the flow rate that is supplied by the ICA (see supplemental Figures 1–3). Relevantly, the collateral flow to the affected territory is achieved by the adjacent vascular territories of the posterior cerebral artery (PCA) and the anterior cerebral artery (ACA). It is a common angiographic finding in the case of a good collateralization that the affected territory is supplied by the adjacent territories, partly by a retrograde flow in the vessels distally to the occlusion site. The more the filling pressure of the pial- and leptomeningeal collaterals is increased, the better the territory is supplied, and the volume of the developing infarct core can be minimized until the successful MT restores the natural hemodynamic situation with antegrade flow in the M1 and simultaneous reduction in the collateral flow. On the contrary, in the case of a missing PComA, there is no direct increase in the filling pressure in the potential adjacent collateral territories of the posterior cerebral artery because this vessel is not directly connected with the occluded vessel. Although the pial- and leptomeningeal collaterals also react in such cases, the filling pressure is not directly increased, which dramatically reduces the effectiveness of collateralization. We hypothesize that this effect is responsible for the worse outcome of patients with a missing PComA (Fig. 3 ). This consideration is supported by the fact that we were able to demonstrate a significant difference between the final infarction volumes between the two groups, differing only in their anatomical features. One possible clinical repercussion of our findings is that in patients with a missing ipsilateral PComA it might be reasonable that higher arterial blood pressure values are held up until successful reperfusion is established to improve collateralization. Fig. 3 Schematic lateral projected illustrations of an occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) (clot in the M1 is marked by an asterisk in A and C ) and the primary collateralization via the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and the posterior cerebral artery (PCA). Abruptly with the occlusion of the M1, the filling pressure in the ACA and PCA is boosted, if there is a strong A1 segment of the ipsilateral ACA and a strong ipsilateral posterior communicating artery (PComA), respectively, as shown in ( B ). As a direct consequence, the filling pressure of the collaterals that originate from the vascular territories that are adjacent to the affected MCA territory is increasing. A large penumbra (green ellipse) can so be maintained, while the infarct core remains small (red ellipse in B ). In the case of an hypoplastic PComA as shown in ( C , D ), the filling pressure of the posterior collaterals is not directly affected (increased) by the MCA occlusion and so the collateralization is worse with a resulting enlargement of the infarct core (red ellipse in D )
The present study is not without limitations. First, it is a retrospective study with all the inherent potential biases. Although both groups are well balanced as we did not see relevant differences concerning technical and clinical parameters, we cannot completely exclude the possibility that there were unconsidered differences between the patients with and without PComAs that ultimately influenced the clinical outcome.
When analyzing the presence of an ipsilateral PComA, there are slight anatomical differences concerning the strength of the vessel ranging from small hypoplastic PComAs to fetal origins of the PCA. We classified the PComA as “present” if visible in DSA. We cannot completely exclude the possibility that an existing PComA was not visible in DSA. Nevertheless, we believe that the relevant PComAs were visible, especially in the DSA runs prior to successful recanalization.
The second limitation is that the patient cohort analyzed in the present study was quite small. Another limitation of our work is that we cannot determine with certainty the cause of the described phenomena. The pathophysiological changes discussed in the previous paragraph are in our opinion a conclusive hypothesis, further supported by the difference in final stroke volumes, but at present it is not possible for us to prove this hypothesis. For this reason, further studies are necessary to investigate the changes in cerebral micro- and macrocirculation in the setting of an acute MCA occlusion.
Conclusion
The presence of an ipsilateral PComA is a predictor for excellent clinical outcome in patients suffering from an MCA occlusion independent of the technical success of mechanical recanalization. This is possibly explained by the increased filling pressure of the primary and secondary collaterals of the adjacent vascular territories which therefore result in smaller infarct volumes. This finding provides insights into the changes in micro- and macrocirculation in acute stroke and once again underlines the importance of collateralization.