Introduction
Syncope is a common condition that affects individuals of all ages. It is responsible for 1–3% of all emergency department (ED) visits, and its incidence is reported to be up to 30% in the general population [ , ]. According to the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines, syncope is defined as a “transient loss of consciousness (TLOC) due to global cerebral hypoperfusion characterized by rapid onset, short duration, and spontaneous complete recovery” [ ].
In line with its heterogeneous pathophysiology, the prognosis of syncope can be either benign, as in the case of a vasovagal spell, or extremely severe, as in cases of pulmonary embolism and aortic dissection. Defining a patient’s progress is one of the main challenges of an ED physician. However, due to the relatively low prevalence of syncopal episodes caused by serious diseases, the results of prospective studies are often limited by the small number of patients enrolled. Notably, this limitation has considerably influenced the clinical applicability of risk stratification tools for the evaluation of syncope in the ED [ , ].
Administrative databases are usually created and used for reimbursement purposes; however, they have become an important source of data for disease observation, assessment of health resource consumption and evaluation of outcomes. In this context, groups of patients with a specific disease can be identified through the International Classification of Diseases (ICD), a world-wide coding system used to categorize patients with the same diagnosis. Several studies have assessed the diagnostic accuracy of ICD codes for the identification of diseases such as ischemic stroke [ , ], heart failure [ ] or deep vein thrombosis [ ]. To our knowledge, only two studies to date, from Denmark and the USA, respectively, have attempted to estimate the diagnostic accuracy of the ICD code for the identification of patients with syncope [ , ]. The study by Ruwald et al. [ ] evaluated the ICD-10 coding system in three Danish hospitals and reported an overall moderate sensitivity. Sun et al. [ ] showed that the positive and negative predictive values of the ICD-9 code in identifying patients with syncope or near-syncope in the USA were 92 and 100%, respectively.
Since the use of the ICD coding system could greatly increase the ability to select patients with syncope, further evidence on the diagnostic accuracy of the code in different countries and clinical settings is warranted.
The aim of our study was to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of code 780.2 of the ninth revision of the ICD (ICD-9) for the identification of patients with syncope in the ED.
Methods
The study was designed as a double-center, retrospective, observational study. The two hospitals involved were a public hospital, Ospedale Luigi Sacco (Milan, Italy) and a private one, Humanitas Research Hospital (Rozzano, Italy), accounting for approximately 47,000 and 49,000 patient visits to the ED per year, respectively. Both hospitals have an open referral ED and a Cardiology Department with catheterization laboratory facilities and both provide the possibility to perform electrocardiography monitoring in the ED and to obtain a rapid consultation with a cardiologist and a neurologist, if needed. Syncope ambulatory follow-up visits and specific tests, such as tilt table test and heart ultrasound, are also easily accessible after discharge from the ED in both hospitals.
For the purpose of this study, access was obtained to anonymized data from the ED electronic databases of the two centers. Variables such as patient identification, admission date, reason for admission based on triage assessment, discharge diagnosis description (i.e. a free text description of the diagnosis given by the physician at ED discharge), ICD discharge code and triage severity code were available. The electronic databases were initially manually screened in order to identify subjects evaluated in the two EDs between the 1 December 2013 and 30 March 2014. All triaged patients admitted to the ED with an assessment synonymous to syncope or as a consequence of the loss of consciousness (i.e. presyncope, syncope, lipothymia, pre-lipothymia, fall, trauma, vertigo, dizziness, wound, hypotension, epilepsy, transient ischemic attack, absence, loss of consciousness, sickness, malaise), or with an assigned ICD 780.2 ED discharge code were included in the study. The list was selected to be highly sensitive. As commonly done in Italy, the reason for admission following triage was recorded by a nurse shortly after ED access, while the discharge ICD code was assigned by a physician at the end of the ED evaluation. Following the same approach adopted in previous prospective syncope studies, we reviewed the included patients’ ED electronic records to exclude all cases in which the description of the episode may imply that the loss of consciousness was the consequence of a trauma and not the cause of it. Patients younger than 18 years of age or patients under the influence of alcohol or illicit drugs at the time of the episode were also excluded.
In order to assess the diagnostic accuracy of the code, the clinical diagnosis of syncope was considered to be the reference standard. The patients’ records were evaluated, and syncope was identified if the term “syncope” was clearly reported in the ED discharge diagnosis description or if the description of the episode was concordant with the ESC definition of syncope [ ].
Subjects included in the study were then considered to be: True positives (TP) if they had both syncope and were assigned ICD-9 code 780.2. True negatives (TN) if they did not have syncope nor were they assigned ICD-9 code 780.2. False positives (FP) if they did not have syncope but were assigned ICD-9 code 780.2. False negatives (FN) if they did have syncope but were not assigned ICD-9 code 780.2.
Demographic data, such as age and sex, as well as the ED diagnosis were recorded for all patients admitted to the study. For patients with syncope, factors such as the time spent in the ED, the ward they had been admitted to for those admitted to the hospital, the ED triage priority code (green, yellow and red for low, medium and high priority, respectively) and the syncope etiology established by the ED physician were also taken into consideration. In FN cases, alternative diagnoses for syncope were evaluated, as were the potentially missed diagnoses for FP subjects.
Two authors manually reviewed all the electronic records of the included cases, and disagreement over cases was resolved by discussion or consultation with a third author to reach a consensus. Data were collected in an Excel™ (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA, USA) database.
All patients’ data were made anonymous, and the study was approved by the Data Protection Agency of the coordinating center (Humanitas Research Hospital).
Statistical analysis
Categorical variables were reported as the mean and standard deviation (SD), while continuous variables were reported as absolute frequencies (percentages).
To evaluate the accuracy of ICD-9 code 780.2, we constructed a 2 × 2 table considering the presence of syncope and the attribution of the code. We then calculated sensitivity, as the rate of TP among all syncope patients, and specificity, as the rate of TN among all non-syncope patients. We also considered the positive predictive value (PPV) of the code, as the rate of TP among all patients assigned ICD-9 code 780.2, and the negative predictive value (NPV), as the rate of TN among all patients not assigned code 780.2. Point estimates and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated.
The Fisher exact test or t test were used to compare specific subsets of patients, where appropriate.
SAS statistical software (release 9.4; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) was used to perform all of the analyses.
Results
During the 4-month inclusion period, 32,586 patients were admitted to the ED of the two centers. Of these, 3357 had a triage diagnosis possibly related to syncope and were included in the study. Following manual revision of the electronic records, a total of 441 (13%) patients with syncope were identified, of whom 277 (63%) were assigned ICD-9 code 780.2. Among the 2916 patients without syncope, 55 (2%) were assigned ICD-9 code 780.2 (Fig. 1 ). Regarding the 3357 patients included in the study with a possible diagnosis related to syncope, for 20 patients the two authors required consultation with the third author to reach consensus on the diagnosis of syncope or no syncope. The mean (± SD) age of the patients was 62.2 ± 20.0 years, and 59% were female. While no statistically significant difference was found in mean age, patients with syncope were more frequently male (47 vs. 40%; p < 0.0001). Fig. 1 Flow chart of patient inclusion
Considering the distribution of patients between index test (attribution of ICD-9 code 780.2) and reference standard (clinical diagnosis of syncope at the end of ED evaluation), the sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of the code were 0.63 (95% CI 0.58–0.67), 0.98 (95% CI 0.98–0.99), 0.83 (95% CI 0.79–0.87) and 0.95 (95% CI 0.94–0.95), respectively (Table 1 ). The comparison between the two centers showed a significant difference in diagnostic accuracy, especially with regards to sensitivity (Electronic Supplementary Material [ESM] Table 1). Table 1 Diagnostic accuracy of International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision code 780.2 for the diagnosis of syncope ICD-9 code Syncope No syncope 780.2 + 277 55 780.2 − 164 2861 PPV (95% CI): 0.83 (0.79–0.87) Sensitivity (95% CI): 0.63 (0.58–0.67) Specificity (95% CI): 0.98 (0.98–0.99) NPV (95% CI): 0.95 (0.94–0.95) 95% CI 95% Confidence interval, ICD-9 International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, NPV negative predictive value, PPV positive predictive value
Among patients with syncope, the average time spent in the ED was 10.5 ± 9.5 h and 1.4% had a high priority code (red) at ED admission. No statistically significant differences were found in the recorded variables between TP and FN patients (Table 2 ). Syncope remained unexplained in 60% of patients, while vaso-vagal, hypotensive and cardiac causes were diagnosed in 19, 13 and 5% of cases, respectively. The admission rate was 30%. Table 2 Demographic characteristics and analyzed variables among patients considered to be true positives and false negatives Patient characteristics True positive False negative Number of patients 277 (63) 164 (37) Age (years) 64.4 ± 19.5 62.3 ± 20.2 Sex Female (%) 142 (51.3) 91 (55.5) Male (%) 135 (48.7) 73 (44.5) Triage severity code Green 119 (43.0) 76 (43.3) Yellow 154 (55.6) 86 (52.4) Red 4 (1.4) 2 (1.2) Time spent in the ED (h) 10.1 ± 8.5 11.2 ± 10.9 Aetiology of syncope Non defined 170 (61.2) 106 (64.6) Cardiac 15 (5.4) 9 (5.5) Vasovagal/situational 56 (20.2) 27 (16.5) Hypotensive 36 (13.0) 22 (13.4) Admission/discharge Discharged 203 (73.2) 125 (76.2) Admitted 71 (25.6) 38 (23.2) Refused admission 1 (0.4) 0 Left the ED 2 (0.7) 1 (0.6) Data in table are presented as the mean ± standard deviation or as a number with the percentage in parenthesis, as appropriate No significant differences were found among all analyzed variables ED emergency department
Among patients in the non-syncope group, mean age was 62.5 ± 20.0 years and 40% were males. No significant differences in mean age and sex distribution were found between the TN and FP groups. The most frequent descriptions of ED discharge diagnoses found for FN patients were related to traumatic (17.7%), cardiologic (13.4%) and gastro-enteric (11.6%) conditions (ESM Table 2). Due to the high heterogeneity among the discharge diagnoses of the FN patients, a specific code that could be used to increase sensitivity could not be identified. Most (81%) of the FP patients had a discharge diagnosis of pre-syncope.
Discussion
The aim of the study was to evaluate whether ICD-9 code 780.2 correctly identifies patients with syncope in the ED. The data analyzed in our study show that the code has a good specificity overall (98%) but moderate sensitivity (63%). Therefore, while nearly all patients assigned the code were patients with syncope, the code failed to recognize a large number of patients with syncope. One possible explanation for the moderate sensitivity observed may be that the code was able to recognize only a subset of patients with syncope. To test this hypothesis, we compared the available characteristics of TP and FN patients. We found no significant difference, but the limited number of variables that could be accessed may have limited our capability to assess for differences between the two groups. Moreover, evaluating the incidence of adverse events among TP and FN patients may have revealed specific subgroups of patients with their own prognostic characteristics. However, due to the retrospective nature of the study, no information was available on follow-up and outcomes.
Another explanation for the moderate sensitivity observed might be that a significant number of patients were assigned the ICD-9 code of the etiological diagnosis of syncope (such as carotid sinus syndrome, orthostatic hypotension or peptic ulcer) rather than code 780.2. This hypothesis seems to be supported by the fact that 30% of FN patients had a diagnosis description that was somehow related to syncope (syncope and head trauma, presyncope, malaise). The discharge diagnosis of the remaining 70% was either a possible cause of syncope, such as cardiac diseases, a consequence of syncope, such as traumatic injury, or a prodromal symptom of syncope, such as nausea or vertigo. These data suggest that ICD-9 code 780.2 might have been assigned when a specific cause for syncope was not identified.
FP patients represented a small proportion (55/3357) of the total subjects included in the study. Most of these (81%) had a diagnosis of pre-syncope. In fact, ICD-9 code 780.2 includes in its definition not only syncope, but also near-syncope. Although it is formally correct to attribute code 780.2 to pre-syncopal episodes, for the purpose of our study this designation was considered to be a FP. Indeed, if the code is used to identify syncope patients in registry studies, the possible inclusion of pre-syncope patients could lead to misleading results. Data on the prognosis of pre-syncope are conflicting [ , , , ]. While some authors found a similar rate of 30-day adverse events in syncope and pre-syncope patients [ ], previous evidence suggests that pre-syncope might be associated with a better prognosis than syncope [ ]. Moreover, the definition of pre-syncope is sometimes subjective and difficult to standardize. Hence, for the purpose of our study we decided to use only the final ED identification of syncope as the reference standard.
To our knowledge, only two earlier studies have evaluated the diagnostic accuracy of the ICD coding system for the identification of syncope [ , ], and these two studies were performed in clinical settings completely different from those at our two centers. Ruwald et al. [ ] assessed the diagnostic accuracy of the ICD-10 discharge diagnosis code R55.9 (syncope and collapse) in three hospitals in the Capital Region of Copenhagen. The results showed an overall good specificity, NPV and PPV (99, 99 and 95%, respectively), but a significantly lower sensitivity (63%); these results are in line with our observations. Notably, the study did not compare TP and FN patients, thus rendering impossible the identification of patients who were not attributed code R55.9.
Sun et al. [ ] evaluated the predictors of 30-day serious events in aged patients. In their study, the PPV and NPV of ICD-9 code 780.2 were 92 and 100%, respectively. Nevertheless, the authors included patients with both syncope and pre-syncope. As described above, we believe that these two entities should be considered separately. Moreover, no data on the sensitivity of the code were reported.
Study limitations
A possible limitation of our study was the choice to evaluate the ICD-9 code instead of that of the new version (ICD-10). However, although the ICD-10 coding system has been used in many studies to identify patients with a specific disease or condition, the ICD-9 code is still commonly used.
In addition, the introduction of the 10th revision of the ICD is quite recent. Thus, to perform retrospective studies, knowledge of the accuracy of the ICD-9 code is essential. For example, since the ICD-10 code was introduced in the USA only in October 2015 its use would limit our ability to identify patients evaluated for syncope before that year. Furthermore, as both the ninth and tenth editions of the ICD use a single specific code for “syncope and collapse”, it is reasonable to believe that the diagnostic accuracy should not change significantly between the two versions. This hypothesis is further supported by the similarity between our data and the data of Ruwald et al. [ ].
For our study we included a selected cohort of subjects who had experienced a possible syncopal episode (either based on triage admission assessment or on ICD-9 discharge code 780.2) among all patients admitted to the ED over a 4-month period. Even though the diagnostic accuracy was evaluated in a subset of ED patients, it is reasonable to believe that the results of our study should not change significantly if the code were to be applied to all ED visits. In particular, since most of the syncopal episodes should be included in the selected cohort, inclusion of all ED admissions would increase the rate of FP patients, thus affecting sensitivity which was already moderate in our dataset.
In our study we could access only a limited number of the patients’ characteristics, and no data on follow-up were available. As emphasized above, this may have limited our capability to assess differences between TP and FN patients.
The diagnostic accuracy of the code varied significantly between the two centers (ESM Table 1). Nevertheless in both Ospedale L. Sacco and Humanitas Research Hospital, the code showed overall good specificity (0.97 and 0.99), PPV (0.82 and 0.85) and NVP (0.95 and 0.94), with only small differences between the two hospitals. The most significant difference was observed in sensitivity (0.74 vs. 0.54), which was inadequate at both centers.
Conclusions
The moderate sensitivity of ICD-9 code 780.2 should be considered when it is used to identify patients with syncope through administrative databases. Our data suggest that the code might be assigned when no specific cause for syncope is identified after ED evaluation. It is possible that the code is useful for the identification of patients with syncope of unknown etiology. One aim of future studies could be to verify this hypothesis.