Introduction
Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a heterogeneous condition that mostly affects young women in their reproductive years. Clinically, POTS is characterized by a rapid increase in heart rate (≥ 30 bpm) that occurs within 10 min upon standing, in the absence of orthostatic hypotension, and chronic (> 6 months) symptoms of cerebral hypoperfusion, such as lightheadedness, blurred vision, and mental clouding [ ]. These symptoms are worse while standing and improve after resting supine. In severe cases, POTS can induce substantial disability, with data from a cross-sectional survey suggesting that around 25% of patients with POTS file for disability and > 50% of these patients disrupt their education [ ].
POTS is a syndrome rather than a disease; multiple overlapping pathophysiologies have been proposed for POTS, including a partial peripheral neuropathy [ , ], a deficit in blood volume, abnormalities in the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system [ , , , ], physical deconditioning [ ], autoantibodies targeting peripheral adrenergic receptors [ ], and a hyperadrenergic state resulting from central activation of the sympathetic nervous system [ ].
Despite the heterogeneity of this syndrome, cardiovascular symptoms, such as orthostatic tachycardia, chronic pre-syncopal symptoms, and syncope often dominate its clinical presentation [ ]. Orthostatic tachycardia could be a compensatory phenomenon to hypovolemia, impaired sympathetic-mediated vasoconstriction, or increased vascular compliance. The latter could induce an exaggerated fluid shift upon standing from the thorax to the lower body. Depending on the mechanisms involved, different POTS phenotypes have been described: hypovolemic POTS, neuropathic POTS, primary hyperadrenergic POTS, and POTS associated with Ehlers–Danlos syndrome hypermobile type (hEDS) and mast cell activation syndrome (Fig. 1 ). In clinical practice, there is overlap in the pathophysiology of POTS, with patients having more than one etiology. Furthermore, POTS is commonly associated with other co-morbid conditions, such as somatic hypervigilance, behavioral amplification, anxiety, depression, and high rates of suicidal ideation [ , ]. Fig. 1 Pathophysiology of postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) and major sub-types
POTS patients also experience a wide array of noncardiovascular complaints, particularly gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms such as chronic nausea, vomiting, bloating, diarrhea, and/or severe constipation. These symptoms are debilitating and have negative consequences as they limit oral intake of fluids and electrolytes, which is the core of POTS treatment. In severe cases, these patients may require intravenous parenteral nutrition or placement of a gastrostomy tube for feeding to treat severe weight loss and malnutrition.
Cross-sectional studies have shown an association between POTS and GI symptoms. However, the methods and techniques used to assess GI function in POTS in these studies varied significantly, thus making it difficult to understand the impact of these symptoms in POTS and the possible mechanism(s) linked to these abnormalities. The purpose of this review article is to systematically examine the available literature on this particular topic by reviewing peer-reviewed articles and publicly available literature.
Methods
Following the PRISMA guidelines for systematic reviews [ ], we performed a comprehensive search in the MedLine/PubMed and Google Scholar databases for peer-reviewed articles, case series, cross-sectional studies, and review manuscripts on GI complications in POTS. We only included articles published in English, until November 2017. A flow diagram according to PRISMA guidelines for this systematic review is shown in Fig. 2 . We used the key words “postural tachycardia syndrome,” gastrointestinal symptoms,” “postural tachycardia syndrome gastric emptying,” “POTS gastrointestinal symptoms,” and “POTS gastrointestinal complications.” We also searched the bibliographies listed in the two review manuscripts that we identified from our initial search for additional references to ensure a thorough and complete review of the literature. For specific co-morbid conditions, such as hEDS and gluten sensitivity, we only included those studies that used these terms in addition to the key words “postural tachycardia syndrome,” “POTS,” and “orthostatic intolerance.” Single case reports, studies in pregnant women, and studies in the pediatric POTS population were excluded from the systematic review because these cases by definition are unique and may not represent the general POTS population. Fig. 2 Flow diagram according to PRISMA guidelines for systematic review of the literature on POTS and gastrointestinal symptoms
Results of literature search
We identified a total of 21 articles, including six case–control studies, two case series, four cross-sectional studies, six retrospective case series, two review articles, and one editorial. The list of articles, authors, and publication information included in this review are presented in Table 1 . Table 1 Lists of peer-reviewed articles included in this systematic review on postural tachycardia syndrome and gastrointestinal symptoms References Title Case series Fikree et al. [ ] Mechanisms underlying reflux symptoms and dysphagia in patients with joint hypermobility syndrome, with and without postural tachycardia syndrome Tursi et al. [ ] Peripheral neurological disturbances, autonomic dysfunction, and antineuronal antibodies in adult celiac disease before and after a gluten-free diet Retrospective case series Al-Shekhlee et al. [ ] The value of autonomic testing in postural tachycardia syndrome Antiel et al. [ ] Orthostatic intolerance and gastrointestinal motility in adolescents with nausea and abdominal pain Loavenbruck et al. [ ] Disturbances of gastrointestinal transit and autonomic functions in postural tachycardia syndrome Nelson et al. [ ] Ehlers–Danlos syndrome and gastrointestinal manifestations: a 20-year experience at Mayo Clinic Park et al. [ ] Gastric emptying in postural tachycardia syndrome: a preliminary report Gibbons and Freeman [ ] Autonomic neuropathy and coeliac disease Review Benarroch [ ] Postural tachycardia syndrome: a heterogeneous and multifactorial disorder Fikree et al. [ ] Gastrointestinal involvement in the Ehlers–Danlos syndromes Cross-sectional De Wandele et al. [ ] Clinical heterogeneity in patients with the hypermobility type of Ehlers–Danlos syndrome Lawal et al. [ ] Rapid gastric emptying is more common than gastroparesis in patients with autonomic dysfunction Seligman et al. [ ] Abnormal gastric myoelectrical activity in postural tachycardia syndrome Wang et al. [ ] Gastrointestinal dysfunction in postural tachycardia syndrome Case control Chaudhuri et al. [ ] Abnormality of superior mesenteric artery blood flow responses in human sympathetic failure Gazit et al. [ ] Dysautonomia in the joint hypermobility syndrome Gibbons et al. [ ] Structural and functional small fiber abnormalities in neuropathic postural tachycardia syndrome Penny et al. [ ] Is there a relationship between gluten sensitivity and postural tachycardia syndrome? Tani et al. [ ] Splanchnic–mesenteric capacitance bed in postural tachycardia syndrome patients Fujimura et al. [ ] Effect of perturbations and a meal on superior mesenteric artery flow in patients with orthostatic hypotension Editorial Hadjivassiliou et al. [ ] Gluten sensitivity as a neurological illness
POTS and GI symptoms
The most frequent noncardiovascular symptoms in POTS patients are nausea and abdominal pain, with pooled data from six studies ( N = 352 patients) showing a prevalence of approximately 69% (Table 2 ). Of note, abnormalities in GI motility provoke symptoms such as early satiety, nausea, bloating, and abdominal pain [ ]. Four of the studies that describe the GI symptoms in patients with POTS also report evidence of abnormal gastric motility—either rapid gastric emptying (43%) or delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis; 20%) [ , , , ]. Table 2 Prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with postural tachycardia syndrome References Title Patient population ( n ) GI symptoms GI motility studies Lawal et al. [ ] Rapid gastric emptying is more common than gastroparesis in patients with autonomic dysfunction 61 patients with POTS (all with mild to moderate CASS) Nausea (49 patients, 80%), vomiting (28, 46%), abdominal pain (54, 67%) Rapid (27 patients, 44.2%), delayed (17, 27.9%) normal (17, 27.9) Antiel et al. [ ] Orthostatic intolerance and gastrointestinal motility in adolescents with nausea and abdominal pain 21 patients with POTS (24% with abnormal sudomotor function) Nausea (15 patients, 71%), vomiting (10, 47%), abdominal pain (14, 67%) Rapid (5 patients, 24%), delayed (4, 19%), normal (12, 57%) Wang et al. [ ] Gastrointestinal dysfunction in postural tachycardia syndrome 28 patients with POTS Nausea (24 patients, 86%), vomiting (11, 40%), abdominal pain (20, 70%) NA Loavenbruck et al. [ ] Disturbances of gastrointestinal transit and autonomic functions in postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome 163 patients with POTS (36% with abnormal sudomotor function) Nausea (34 patients, 21%), vomiting (16, 10%) Rapid (78 patients, 48%), delayed (30, 18%), normal (5, (34%) Park et al. [ ] Gastric emptying in postural tachycardia syndrome: a preliminary report 22 patients with POTS (32% with abnormal sudomotor function) Nausea or vomiting (18 patients, 82%), abdominal pain (8, 59%) Rapid (6 patients, 27%), delayed (2, 9%), Normal (14, 63%) Al-Shekhlee et al. [ ] The value of autonomic testing in postural tachycardia syndrome 19 patients with neuropathic-POTS/38 patients with non-neuropathic POTS Combined symptoms (nausea and vomiting) (13 patients, 68%/10, 26%) NA GI Gastrointestinal, CASS Composite autonomic scoring scale, NA data not available
Only one study evaluated the pathophysiology of the abnormal gastric motility in POTS. Seligman et al. [ ] reported the gastric myoelectrical activity in 15 POTS patients versus 11 healthy individuals before and after ingestion of a standard liquid meal. The authors observed greater pre-and post-prandial variability in the gastric pacemaker rhythm in POTS patients than in controls.
Three different studies reported that the majority of POTS patients with GI symptoms have evidence of autonomic neuropathy. For example, Loavenbruck et al. [ ] and Park et al. [ ] showed that nearly 30% of POTS patients with GI symptoms have abnormal results on the quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test (QSART), which is a surrogate measure of post-ganglionic autonomic innervation. Al-Shekhlee et al. [ ] stratified the occurrence of GI symptoms based on the presence or absence of autonomic neuropathy using QSART. In their study, the prevalence of GI symptoms in POTS patients with autonomic neuropathy was 68% compared with 26% in patients without evidence of autonomic neuropathy.
One of the major challenges when comparing studies is the lack of consensus on the definition and diagnosis of autonomic neuropathy in POTS. Our group previously defined neuropathic POTS as a subgroup of POTS with a partial peripheral autonomic neuropathy primarily affecting lower extremities. Neuro-hormonal characterization of these patients showed a decrease in norepinephrine spillover in response to sympathetic activation in the legs but not in the arms. Furthermore, these patients had an abnormal sweat volume and prolonged latency based on evaluation by QSART [ ].
Gibbons and Freeman [ ] defined neuropathic POTS as a reduced intra-epidermal nerve fiber density through skin biopsies with impaired sensory or sudomotor function. It is noteworthy that there is no concordance between the different markers of autonomic neuropathy (abnormal skin biopsies, sudomotor testing, or quantitative sensory analyses) in the same patient. Consequently, neuropathic POTS should be defined based on a combination of different biomarkers.
In summary, the review of the available literature on GI symptoms in POTS patients showed that these symptoms, in particular early satiety, nausea, bloating, and abdominal pain, are very common in POTS and that these GI symptoms are associated with abnormalities in GI motility. Abnormal gastric pacemaker rhythm has been proposed as the underlying mechanism; however, there is a paucity of data, with only one study reporting differences between POTS versus controls. Moreover, the prevalence of GI symptoms is greater in POTS patients with autonomic neuropathy. These findings suggest a possible mechanistic link between GI symptoms, abnormal GI motility, and autonomic neuropathy in POTS.
POTS, GI symptoms, and related co-morbidities
GI symptoms in POTS and EDS
Ehlers–Danlos syndromes is a group of heritable disorders of the connective tissue [ ]. According to the recent classification of the International EDS Consortium, there are 13 major types of EDS [ ]. Type V (formerly known as EDS-III) or hEDS is one of the most common types, affecting 1 in 5000 individuals, and is frequently associated with POTS [ ]. hEDS is a chronic, disabling condition, characterized by large and small joint and spine hypermobility, frequent joint dislocation, chronic pain, and chronic GI symptoms [ ]. GI co-morbid conditions in EDS include reflux, dysphagia, hiatal hernias, visceroptosis, rectocele, and rectal prolapse, as well as GI functional disorders related to abnormal gut motility in the fore- and hindgut [ , ]. In patients with hEDS, the GI symptoms are very prominent and often present as the primary complaint.
In a retrospective observational study, around 60% of patients with colonic transit abnormalities had hEDS, and 22% had abnormal gastric emptying [ ]. De Wandele et al. asked a cohort of patients with hEDS ( N = 78) to complete self-reported questionnaires; these patients described GI symptoms such as motility dysfunction, bloating, and swallowing problems clustered with cardiovascular symptoms such as POTS and other forms of orthostatic intolerance [ ].
More recently, Fikree et al. studied a similar patient population ( N = 30 hEDS patients, 12 without POTS and 18 with POTS) and performed GI physiological studies (multichannel intraluminal impedance-pH testing and high-resolution manometry testing) [ ]. In this cohort, 53% of patients had pathological acid reflux, 21% had hypersensitive reflux, and 25% had functional reflux. Furthermore, 60% had functional dysphagia with normal esophageal motility. The POTS group was more likely to have esophageal hypomobility and pathological gastro-esophageal reflux [ ].
It remains unknown why patients with POTS and hEDS have a higher prevalence of GI symptoms and dysmotility. Structural and functional abnormalities in the GI connective tissue may play a significant role; however, further studies are needed to clarify this aspect of POTS.
POTS and gluten sensitivity
Celiac disease (CD) and non-celiac gluten sensitivity (NCGS) are immune-mediated small bowel enteropathies [ ]. GI symptoms such as abdominal pain, bloating, and diarrhea are frequent in both conditions. Previous studies also reported cardiovascular symptoms, such as palpitations, dizziness, and presyncope in patients with CD and NCGS, suggesting autonomic dysfunction [ , ]. However, the association between POTS and CD is still open to debate.
Only one study on POTS and gluten sensitivity met our eligibility criteria. Penny et al. [ ] reported that the prevalence of CD was 4% in a large POTS cohort and that this prevalence was higher than that found in a control group (1%) matched for age and gender (odds ratio 4.1, 95% confidence interval 1.3–13.0; p = 0.03). The prevalence of self-reported gluten sensitivity and of irritable bowel syndrome were also higher in the POTS cohort than in the controls. Approximately 6% of POTS patients complained of gluten sensitivity despite having negative celiac serology and normal duodenal biopsy. The mechanism by which gluten sensitivity may result in neurological complications, including autonomic dysfunction, has not been elucidated. Among the possible culprits are: (1) malabsorption of nutrients such as thiamine, folic acid, vitamin B12, and vitamin E, all of which are important for neuronal protection and plasticity [ , , ]; (2) the presence of antigliadin and transglutaminase antibodies which can target neural tissue, particularly in the central nervous system (CNS) [ , , ]; (3) the co-existence with other autoimmune disorders commonly observed in POTS. Even though patients are likely to reduce gluten in their diet, there are no well-controlled studies in POTS patients with either CD or NCGS that evaluate the efficacy of gluten-free diet on GI and cardiovascular symptoms in this population.
Proposed pathophysiology for GI symptoms in POTS
In normal circumstances, an autonomous integrated neural mechanism controls GI tract motility, secretion, and blood flow to enable digestion, absorption of fluid and nutrients, and elimination of waste. Different neuronal cell types and glia form the enteric nervous system (ENS), which dwell in the myenteric and submucosal plexus of the GI tract. GI motility is primarily under the control of the myenteric plexus between the longitudinal and circular muscles. The submucosal plexus, located between circular muscles and the GI mucosa, regulates fluid absorption, secretion, and blood flow, and it responds to exogenous stimuli to maintain GI function [ ].
While the ENS provides a significant degree of autonomy for different functions of the GI tract, the CNS also sends extrinsic neural inputs that modulate and control these functions. In contrast to the stomach and the esophagus, the small and large intestine show a remarkable amount of independence from CNS control [ ].
Denervation of the stomach causes abnormal gastric electrical activity and produces GI symptoms such as nausea and vomiting, abdominal discomfort pain, and diarrhea. However, the gastric activity partly recovers after a period of time [ ]. Extrinsic innervation of the GI tract is mainly through sympathetic and parasympathetic afferent and efferent nerves.
The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) provides innervation to the enteric ganglia, the circular muscles of sphincters, and the mucosa of the stomach and intestines [ ]. The SNS also negatively regulates its motor and secretory functions. The absence of sympathetic inhibitory innervation, as seen in POTS patients with partial autonomic neuropathy, may cause excessive and uncoordinated activity in the GI tract [ ]. This could, in theory, be a possible mechanism to explore when evaluating the pathophysiology of GI symptoms in POTS, particularly the neuropathic type. It is noteworthy that patients with a higher occurrence of GI complications also complain of increased postprandial orthostatic symptoms. Therefore, it is possible that an uncoupling effect between the neuro-muscular and neurovascular regulation of the splanchnic regulation induces an increase in the blood pooling in this vascular bed, which could worsen the orthostatic symptoms. This hypothesis, however, needs to be clarified through further research.
POTS, GI symptoms, and splanchnic circulation
In a healthy person, more than one-third of the total blood volume is compartmentalized in the splanchnic vascular bed that receives up to 25% of the resting cardiac output [ ]. The splanchnic circulation is a larger reservoir than the limbs and is, therefore, particularly crucial during postural changes and after meals. A standard meal results in about an approximately 300% increase in mesenteric blood volume [ ]. Previous studies in humans have shown that the splanchnic blood flow is modulated through sympathoneural stimulation [ , ].
The most common complaints of POTS patients treated at the Vanderbilt Autonomic Dysfunction Center are worsening pre-syncopal symptoms and tachycardia after meals, particularly meals rich in carbohydrates. It has also been observed that the pre-syncopal symptoms of these patients are curbed when small meals are eaten throughout the day and the carbohydrate content in their diet is curbed. We observed a very similar pattern in our patients with severe autonomic failure and neurogenic orthostatic hypotension; these patients have severe post-prandial hypotension. The hemodynamic changes after a meal are related to the release of vasoactive gut hormones that increase splanchnic blood sequestration. Chaudhuri et al. [ ] showed that active vasoconstriction of the superior mesenteric artery after a sympathetic stimulus does not occur in patients with autonomic failure, possibly contributing to the postprandial hypotension. In these patients, the increased blood sequestration in the splanchnic circulation is related to the release of vasoactive gut hormones. It is plausible, therefore, that similar hemodynamic changes occur after meal ingestion in POTS patients, but to a lesser extent than in those with autonomic failure.
In this context, Tani et al. [ ] reported an increase in resting mesenteric blood flow and reduced splanchnic vascular resistance despite normal systemic vascular resistance. After a meal, POTS patients had a larger increase in mesenteric blood flow than did the controls, suggesting that the former have excessive splanchnic capacitance during resting conditions and possibly after a meal. The increased splanchnic capacitance in patients with POTS and the augmented requirements of the SNS to counteract these changes could explain, in part, the worsening orthostatic tolerance in these patients after meals.
Diagnosis and treatment of impaired gastric motility in POTS
As previously discussed, POTS patients, particularly those with hEDS and autonomic neuropathy, have a high prevalence of abnormal gastric motility. However, they also have a high prevalence of functional GI disorders. These conditions require different treatments, and therefore a careful evaluation is needed to provide an adequate diagnosis. In addition to providing a complete medical history and undergoing a complete physical examination that includes the removal of medications that could affect GI motility, some patients may also require gastric motility studies.
All of the methods available to the physician to evaluate gastric motility are summarized in Table 3 , together with a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of each method. The majority of the studies that have evaluated gastric motility in POTS patients have used gamma camera scintigraphy because this is a non-invasive test that is available in most radiological centers. However, these studies differ in terms of the diet used and duration of the measurement. The American Neurogastroenterology and Motility Society and the Society of Nuclear Medicine published a consensus standard for gastric emptying studies that include standardization of diet and appropriate duration of the study (4 h). Future studies should use these recommendations and compare results with the current normative data [ ]. Table 3 Comparison of the different methods currently used to assess gastric motility in humans Diagnostic test Advantages Disadvantages Gamma camera scintigraphy Available for clinical use, allows direct measurement of gastric motility, non-invasive Radiation exposure, prolonged study Wireless pH and motility capsule Non-invasive, direct measurement of gastric and intestinal motility Limits patient’s activity, risk of capsule retention Stable isotope breath tests Non-invasive measurement, applicable for children and pregnant women Lack of standardized meal Magnetic resonance image Measures multiple parameters, assesses emptying fat and water separately Can be used in supine position, not commonly available, elevated cost, subject must hold breath during testing Balloon measurement Gold standard for measurement of volume Needs intubation SPECT Non-invasive, rate and volume measurement simultaneously Not widely available, only used in supine position Manometry Records pressure of distal stomach, pylorus, and duodenum Invasive and painful Acetaminophen intestinal absorption test Non-invasive, non-expensive Just for liquid phase of gastric emptying, need several blood draws
One of the common conditions reported in POTS is delayed gastric emptying or gastroparesis. This is a difficult and still ill-defined syndrome to manage, with few effective treatments and a paucity of well-controlled trials. The symptoms are non-specific, and the gold standard diagnostic test remains the 4-h gastric emptying scintigraphy with a solid meal.
Medical treatments
In the literature, there are no clinical trials that test the effect of specific interventions in patients with POTS and GI symptoms. Furthermore, there are no studies that evaluated differences in the pathophysiology of the most common GI conditions described in POTS versus patients without POTS with similar symptoms.
In the following sections, we briefly summarize current medical and surgical treatment approaches for the most common GI symptoms reported in POTS based on evidence from the literature derived from studies that enrolled non-POTS patients with these conditions.
Dietary modifications
Dietary modifications are among the first measures to be taken in the treatment of gastroparesis. In addition to addressing nutritional deficiencies that are often presenting, such changes can impact the severity of the symptoms experienced by patients. Many gastroparetic patients have intakes deficient in calories, vitamins, and minerals, and they often tend to reduce meals to one or two foods or food categories. Dietary recommendations include modifications to meal content and frequency and an emphasis on more liquid-based or blenderized meals as the gastric emptying of liquids appears to be more conserved in gastroparesis. Further possible helpful dietary modifications include reducing the size of single meals and consuming six to eight small feedings/meals per day [ , ]. Reduction in fat and fiber intake has also been recommended as these tend to prolong gastric emptying. Smoking cessation should also be emphasized as smoking may worsen gastric function. However, patient compliance with these measures is poor.
Pharmacological therapy
The pharmacotherapy of gastroparesis is aimed at increasing gastric emptying, reducing nausea and promoting a sense of well-being. The most commonly used medications are discussed in the following sections.
Prokinetic agents
This group of drugs increases antral contractility, reduces gastric dysrhythmias, and improves coordination between the antrum and duodenum. The effect is modest, and responses are assessed clinically [ ]. There is a poor correlation between the improvement in gastric emptying secondary to use of pro-kinetic agents and the improvement in symptoms.
The macrolide erythromycin is a potent prokinetic through it action in activating the motilin receptors, but the associated rapid onset of tachyphylaxis and many adverse effects preclude long-term efficacy and use. Metoclopramide is currently the only medication for the treatment of gastroparesis that has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). It is mainly a dopamine type 2 receptor (D2) antagonist and aids in the release of acetylcholine, which in turn increases antral contractility, antroduodenal tone, and gastric emptying [ ]. Long-term data on the efficacy of metoclopramide are not available. Its most serious side effect is the occurrence of extrapyramidal movement disorders, tardive dyskinesia, and akathisia in a significant number of patients (30–40%). Drowsiness, fatigue, and depression also occur frequently. The FDA has a black box warning against the chronic use of metoclopramide [ ]. Domperidone, another D2-antagonist, has much less penetration through the blood–brain barrier than metoclopramide. Although used throughout the world, domperidone has not been approved by the FDA because of unconvincing efficacy data, although it does possess a good safety profile [ ].
Anti-emetic agents
Nausea is the most common symptoms of gastroparesis and is reported by up to 90–95% of patients, although only 55–80% report vomiting [ ]. It is, therefore, no surprise that antiemetic agents without prokinetic activity are often used in addressing the symptoms of gastroparesis. Antiemetic therapy comprises 5-HT3-antagonists (ondansetron), cannabinoids (dronabinol), benzodiazepines (lorazepam) and H1-antagonists (promethazine); all can be of benefit in relieving nausea [ ]. Symptom improvement at 48 weeks did not differ between patients using and not using antiemetics, suggesting that anti-emetics provide at best a modest and short-lived benefit. Histamine H 1 -antagonists (i.e., promethazine, meclizine, dimenhydrinate), although used in gastroparetic patients, have been more useful in conditions with activation of the vestibular system and in postoperative settings. However, promethazine as a phenothiazine analog exerts its central antiemetic effects partly through antagonism of D 2 -receptors [ ]. Psychotropic agents, such as tricyclic antidepressants at doses lower than those used to treat depression, are also frequently used for refractory symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain [ ]. Evidence of efficacy for this use is lacking.
Surgical treatment
Failure of nutritional and dietary and intensive medical treatments and the presence of severe nutritional deficits are often reasons for seeking surgical treatment. The consensus is lacking for surgical and endoscopic treatment options, reflective of the highly variable responses of patients. Endoscopic treatment of gastroparesis involves the injection of Botox into the pyloric sphincter. Although a large percentage of patients respond initially, the results are temporary, and second injections do not result in any added benefit [ , , ]. Currently, Botox injections are used sparingly and do not reliably predict responses to surgical pyloroplasty.
In patients with severe gastroparesis refractory to medical management, particularly in those with malnutrition, surgical placement of a gastro-jejunostomy or jejunostomy tube can be performed. This provides an effective means of infusing fluids, nutrition, and medications if oral intake is not tolerated. The procedures can be performed via endoscopy or laparoscopy; the combined use of a gastro-jejunal tube allows for simultaneous gastric decompression.
Gastric electrical stimulation (GES) is a surgical option that was granted humanitarian approval from the FDA in 2000 for the treatment of chronic, refractory nausea and vomiting due to diabetic or idiopathic gastroparesis. Approval was based on a study showing improvement in gastroparesis symptoms and gastric emptying [ ]. Long-term studies have confirmed that about 70% of patients treated with GES have significantly decreased gastrointestinal symptoms, an improved quality of life, and recovery of nutritional status that can last for several years [ , ]. Even though GI symptoms improve, there is little data showing improvement in gastric emptying.
Since GES does not improve gastric emptying, several groups have considered that a surgical pyloroplasty may improve gastric emptying by creating a larger outlet. Surgical pyloroplasty can be safely performed either alone or in conjunction with GES implantation. Although the injection of Botox can result in a transient decrease in symptoms, unfortunately, this does not predict a positive response to pyloroplasty [ , , ]. Moreover, many of the patients with an initial response to pyloroplasty alone require subsequent placement of GES [ ]. Controlled, randomized studies are needed to confirm these preliminary positive results.
As a last resort, sub-total or total gastrectomy has been undertaken in patients refractory to all other treatment modalities. Although some positive results have been reported, long-term nutritional deficiencies persist.
Conclusions
In addition to the cardiovascular symptoms, POTS patients have an approximately 69% prevalence of GI symptoms and impaired GI motility, such as delayed gastric emptying. Furthermore, the consumption of meals not only triggers GI symptoms but also worsens orthostatic intolerance in patients with POTS. Results from cross-sectional studies suggest that GI symptoms and GI abnormal motility are more frequent in patients with hEDS and neuropathic POTS than in other groups. The field is in need of further studies that address the pathophysiology of these symptoms. These studies should aim to assess differences in autonomic regulation of GI motility, GI hormonal secretion and GI splanchnic circulation between patients with the various subgroups of POTS and normal controls.