Introduction
Cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) is a chronic functional gastrointestinal disorder characterized by recurrent, stereotypical episodes of severe nausea and vomiting interspersed with periods of little or no symptoms. Samuel Gee, a pediatrician, first described the condition in 1882 in 9 children ranging in age from 4 to 8 years [ ]. CVS was thought to be a pediatric disorder but recent data indicate that it is as common in adults. While its exact pathogenesis is unclear, several theories have been postulated, including dysregulation of the brain–gut axis, genetic factors such as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations and polymorphisms involving the cannabinoid receptor type 1 and μ-opioid receptor genes, autonomic dysfunction, and possible dysfunction of the endocannabinoid system and the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis [ , , , , , , , ]. CVS is considered to be a variant of migraine [ ]. In fact, many antimigraine therapies such as tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) [ , ], triptans [ ], antiepileptics such as topiramate [ , ], and antiemetics such as promethazine, metoclopramide [ , ], and ondansetron [ ] are also used and are found to be effective in CVS, based on open-label and retrospective studies [ , , , , , ]. This suggests that they have a similar pathophysiology. Further, approximately 80% of children with CVS outgrow their symptoms and develop migraine headaches as adults. It has also been proposed that cyclic vomiting may be caused by chronic cannabis use, and an entity called cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) was coined. CHS is similar to CVS except for the pattern of chronic, heavy cannabis use [ ]. Ongoing legalization of cannabis in many states in the US and a possible increase in the incidence of CHS has prompted considerable interest in this condition, but it is unclear if this is a subset of CVS or a separate entity. Further discussion of CHS is, however, beyond the scope of this article.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of CVS in children ranges from 0.04 to 1.9%, and the incidence was 3 per 100,000 annually in a study of school-aged children in Scotland [ , ]. Epidemiological data for CVS in adults are scarce. The prevalence of CVS in an outpatient gastroenterology clinic was 11% and it was markedly underdiagnosed in the community; only about 5% of these patients were initially diagnosed accurately by their referring physicians, despite meeting the criteria for a diagnosis of CVS [ ]. Increasing awareness about CVS and establishing uniform diagnostic codes should allow us to obtain more accurate information about its prevalence and incidence in adults in the future.
While CVS affects both males and females, studies on the male to female ratio have demonstrated mixed results. Several studies have concluded that the syndrome is slightly more predominant in males, while others suggest a greater female preponderance [ , , , , ]. A study of 101 patients with CVS revealed that pediatric patients were significantly more likely to be female compared to adult patients (86 vs 57%) [ ]. A more recent study found that 74% of adults with CVS were female [ ].
Several studies have consistently shown that individuals with CVS are predominantly white, followed by African American and Hispanic [ , , ]. A recent nationwide analysis of over 20,000 patients with CVS admitted to hospital demonstrated that 63% of patients were white, 18% were African American, and 6% were Hispanic [ ].
The mean age of onset of symptoms in adults is 35 years and 5 years in children [ ]. Adults tend to experience a greater delay in diagnosis than children, and this could be explained by the prevailing notion among the medical community that CVS is a pediatric disorder.
Clinical features
There are four phases of CVS: the prodromal phase, the emetic phase, the recovery phase, and the inter-episodic or asymptomatic phase, as described by Fleisher (Fig. 1 ) [ ]. Fig. 1 Phases of cyclic vomiting syndrome. Adapted from [ ]
The prodromal phase precedes the emetic phase. It is similar to that seen with migraine headaches when patients experience forewarning signs of an impending attack. Ninety-three percent of patients with CVS have some form of identifiable prodrome with symptoms such as nausea, sweating, abdominal pain or “pressure,” fatigue or weakness, feeling hot and/or cold, having an urge to defecate, and insomnia [ ]. Often, patients are in a state of panic, and have an impending sense of doom. This phase can last from a few minutes to several hours. The prodromal phase has important therapeutic implications because patients can use medications to abort or prevent the onset of a full-blown episode during this phase.
During the emetic phase, patients have relentless nausea, vomiting, and retching. Both children and adults have similar clinical symptoms. Episodes last anywhere from a few hours to several days, though the Rome IV criteria stipulate that episodes should last less than a week [ ]. The sensitivity and specificity of the Rome criteria for making a diagnosis of CVS are not established and are difficult to ascertain given the absence of a biomarker. Abdominal pain is present during an episode in 67–80% of children and 58–71% of adults [ ]. Other symptoms include headache, photosensitivity, sensitivity to sounds (phonosensitivity), diarrhea, cold sweats, hot flashes, excessive salivation, and vertigo [ ]. Patients can appear lethargic and withdrawn or agitated, and may be difficult to understand during an episode due to an inability to communicate effectively. In fact, caregivers describe this as being in a “conscious coma.” One of the unique features of CVS is the “compulsive hot water bathing” pattern reported by patients [ ]. Patients state that bathing in very hot water relieves symptoms, and they shower up to 20 times a day during an episode. Though this compulsive hot water bathing pattern was significantly associated with cannabis use (odds ratio 2.54; confidence interval 1.50–4.31) [ ], it is also seen in 48% of patients with CVS who do not use cannabis [ ]. A small percentage of these patients even sustain burns, which is referred to as erythema ab igne [ ].
Episodes of CVS are usually stereotypical in nature and patients report the same pattern of symptoms during each attack. In one study, 85% of patients experienced attacks of uniform length [ ], but these episodes may get longer with time, especially if left untreated. Symptoms usually start most frequently in the early morning hours. The emetic phase is followed by the recovery phase when patients resume eating and are able to tolerate a diet. This can be very quick and dramatic, particularly in children, but can last several days in some instances. Patients return to baseline health and are either completely normal in between episodes or have some inter-episodic nausea and/or dyspepsia. This phase can last from weeks to months and is highly variable. Some patients may experience a coalescence of symptoms when episodes increase in frequency and the well phase between episodes is reduced. As a result, patients are unwell most of the time and the typical episodic nature of the disorder may be absent. The diagnosis is particularly difficult to make in these instances, and a careful history will usually clarify the diagnosis [ ].
Both physiological and psychological stressors can trigger or precipitate the onset of a CVS episode. These include unpleasant events such as the loss of a loved one, exams, etc. or pleasant events such as weddings, birthdays, and vacations. Many patients have episodes that coincide with the menstrual cycle, and this is referred to as catamenial CVS. Other triggers include sleep deprivation, physical exhaustion, and starvation, among many others [ , , , ]. In one study, 67% of patients reported that an unpleasant event was their most common trigger [ ]. In another study, women noted menstrual periods as their most frequent trigger (catamenial CVS), while noxious stress precipitated CVS episodes most commonly in men [ ].
Patients with CVS have multiple comorbid conditions such as anxiety, depression, migraine, irritable bowel syndrome, syncope, seizures, chronic fatigue syndrome, autonomic dysfunction, and substance/alcohol abuse [ , , ].
Diagnosis
Given the lack of a specific biomarker, CVS is diagnosed using Rome criteria. The Rome IV criteria for the diagnosis of CVS in adults is shown in Table 1 [ ]. The Rome IV criteria are similar to Rome III except for some minor changes. The Rome IV criteria recognize that patients with CVS may have milder symptoms of nausea and/or dyspepsia in between episodes. Taking a detailed history is the key to diagnosis, and expensive and unnecessary investigations should be avoided. The differential diagnosis for CVS includes peptic ulcer disease, pancreatitis, gastroparesis, intermittent small bowel obstruction, biliary tract dysmotility, appendicitis, renal colic, urea cycle defects, acute intermittent porphyria, adrenal insufficiency, central nervous system disorders like hydrocephalus, among many others [ , ], but a careful history and minimal testing can exclude these disorders in most instances. Upper endoscopy or an upper GI series should be performed to rule out any organic causes that may mimic CVS. Gastric emptying patterns are variable in CVS. Many patients may have rapid gastric emptying [ ], while some have normal or delayed patterns of emptying. Hence, gastric emptying tests are not particularly helpful for making a diagnosis. The greatest challenge is to differentiate CVS from CHS. Complete resolution of symptoms following sustained cessation of cannabis use favors a diagnosis of CHS, though most patients are typically reluctant to abstain [ ]. Other clues that hint at a diagnosis of CHS are the presence of heavy cannabis use (several times a week) versus sporadic or occasional use and symptom onset that clearly follows cannabis use. Onset of symptoms can occur after a long period of cannabis use ranging from 2 to 10 years. The reasons for this lag in symptom onset following cannabis use in CHS is not clear. Table 1 Rome IV criteria for the diagnosis of cyclic vomiting syndrome in adults Criteria must be fulfilled for last 3 months, with onset at least 6 months prior to diagnosis 1. Stereotypical episodes of vomiting regarding onset (acute) and duration (less than 1 week) Episodes abrupt in onset and occurring at least 1 week apart 2. Three or more discrete episodes in the prior year Two episodes in the past 6 months with absence of vomiting between episodes. Other milder symptoms can be present between episodes. 3. Personal and/or family history of migraines are supportive criteria Adapted from [ ]
Treatment
General measures and lifestyle modification
Long-term management includes proper education about the condition and recognizing and avoiding known triggers such as sleep deprivation, fasting, and physical exhaustion. Patients should be screened for any underlying psychiatric comorbidities such as anxiety and depression, and referral to a psychologist or psychiatrist may be warranted in some cases. Since chronic cannabis use is associated with nonresponse to therapy and hyperemesis, patients should be encouraged to abstain from cannabis use [ ]. Patients often benefit from a multidisciplinary approach with a team that includes a primary care physician, gastroenterologist, psychologist, and nursing staff who are familiar with the disorder.
Prophylactic therapy
During the inter-episodic phase, therapy is largely prophylactic, with the goal being to decrease the severity and frequency of episodes. Prophylactic therapy is recommended for patients with moderate/severe disease. Moderate to severe disease is defined as > 4 episodes of CVS per year, severe nausea and vomiting, recurrent ED visits or hospitalizations, and an inability to maintain normal activities of living (Fig. 2 ). Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) are first-line agents for prophylaxis of CVS and have been shown to reduce the duration, frequency, and severity of episodes as well as the number of emergency department visits and hospitalizations [ ]. Amitriptyline is typically started at a low dose of 25 mg and gradually increased to a target dose of approximately 100 mg at night in adults. Side effects of TCAs include dry mouth, somnolence, constipation, postural hypotension, chronic fatigue, and blurred vision. TCAs can cause a prolongation of the QT interval, and an EKG should be obtained at baseline and during titration of TCAs to monitor this [ ]. Other TCAs that have fewer side effects include nortriptyline and doxepin, and these may be substituted for amitriptyline. In patients who cannot tolerate TCAs, anticonvulsants such as zonisamide or levetiracetam can be considered. In an uncontrolled study of 20 patients who did not tolerate TCAs and were started on zonisamide (median dose of 400 mg/day) or levetiracetam (median dose of 1000 mg/day), 75% had a moderate clinical response while 20% had a complete remission of symptoms [ ]. Topiramate, another anticonvulsant and antimigraine agent, can also be used for prophylactic therapy [ ]. It is usually started at 25 mg daily and titrated by 25 mg each week to a target dose of 100 mg once daily. This may be increased further if needed until a clinical response is achieved. Topiramate levels are often obtained to guide treatment. There is a small risk of renal stones, and patients should be advised to optimize their fluid intake. Topiramate may also cause a decrease in bicarbonate levels, and this should be supplemented if found to be low. Fig. 2 Suggested algorithm for the management of cyclic vomiting syndrome. Adapted and modified from [ ]
Aprepitant is a new tachykinin (NK1) receptor antagonist that has been approved for the management of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Aprepitant was effective both as a prophylactic (40–125 mg orally twice a week) and an abortive agent (80–125 mg on the first day followed by 40–80 mg on the second and third days) in 41 children with CVS [ ]. Patients who received aprepitant showed a significant decrease in the number of episodes of CVS annually as well as decreases in the duration of episodes and number of emeses/episode. The number of hospitalizations due to CVS was also reduced, and children had higher school attendance with therapy [ ]. Side effects of aprepitant were mostly mild to moderate and included hiccough, asthenia/fatigue, increased appetite causing weight gain, mild headache, and severe migraine [ ]. None of the subjects discontinued the medication due to the side effects except for the child who developed severe migraine. Other medications used as prophylactic therapy include mitochondrial supplements such as coenzyme Q10 and l -carnitine [ , , ]. The typical dose of coenzyme Q10 in adults is 200 mg twice daily, and that of l -carnitine is 100 mg/kg/day twice daily. Alternative therapies such as acupressure and acupuncture can be considered for CVS prevention, though there are no trials in CVS [ ]. Acupuncture resulted in dramatic improvement in two patients with functional vomiting [ ]. Acupressure at the Neiguan point (P6) has been found to be effective in nausea and vomiting related to pregnancy [ ] and the postoperative period [ ], but its efficacy in CVS is yet to be assessed.
Abortive therapy
The therapeutic goal of abortive therapy is to terminate an episode of CVS and prevent vomiting. Despite the lack of randomized controlled trials, among the most common and effective abortive medications are triptans such as sumatriptan, a 5-hydroxytryptamine-1 receptor 1B/1D agonist, which can be administered intranasally or subcutaneously. In a retrospective study of 77 patients on triptan therapy, 83% successfully aborted episodes [ ]. In addition, ondansetron and benzodiazepines (e.g., lorazepam) are also used routinely for their antiemetic and anxiolytic effects respectively. These medications are most effective when given early in the prodromal phase, and patients should be clearly instructed on their proper use.
Supportive therapy
Care during the emetic phase is largely supportive. Expeditious treatment with IV hydration, antiemetics, and sedatives with or without analgesics is recommended. Since vomiting can lead to hypokalemia, potassium replacement might be necessary. Intravenous H2 receptor blockers or proton pump inhibitors may be used until the patient starts eating. Antiemetics such as ondansetron, prochlorperazine, and promethazine are effective at attenuating nausea and vomiting. Since QT prolongation can occur with the administration of certain antiemetics such as ondansetron, a baseline EKG is usually recommended. Sedation with intravenous benzodiazepines (e.g., lorazepam) is often required in cases with relentless nausea and vomiting. Patients also benefit from limiting sensory stimuli such as bright lights and noise. The patient’s room should be kept dark or dimly lit, and interruptions during sleep should be minimized. IV opioids may be required for pain management, which usually include hydromorphone or morphine, but they should be used judiciously and patients and physicians must be cognizant of the risks of possible dependence and addiction, especially with frequent or long-term use. Supportive care should be provided until the emetic phase resolves and the patient is able to resume oral intake. Premature discharge from the hospital may result in recurrent hospitalizations and patient dissatisfaction and should be avoided. The medications used for supportive care are summarized in Table 2 . Table 2 Treatment of cyclic vomiting syndrome during an acute episode General Class Examples Supportive care Dark, quiet surroundings Hydration Intravenous fluids 5–10% dextrose or normal saline Antiemetics 1. 5-HT 3 receptor antagonists 2. Phenothiazines with H1, D2, acetylcholine blockade 3. D2 receptor antagonists 4. Antihistamines 1. Ondansetron 2. Promethazine, prochlorperazine 3. Metoclopramide, domperidone 4. Diphenhydramine Anxiolytics Benzodiazepines Lorazepam Analgesics 1. NSAIDs 2. Opioids 1. Ketorolac IV/IM 2. Hydromorphone, Morphine Gastric acid suppressants 1. Proton pump inhibitors 2. H2 blockers 1. Omeprazole 2. Ranitidine 5-HT 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor, H1 histamine receptor 1, D2 dopamine receptor 2, NSAIDs nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, H2 histamine receptor 2
A proposed algorithm for the treatment of CVS is shown in Fig. 2 .
Conclusion
In summary, CVS is common and disabling and affects both adults and children. The pathophysiology of CVS is unknown, but various genetic and environmental factors, chronic heavy cannabis use, stress, and impaired endocannabinoid signaling may play a role. The role of chronic cannabis use in CVS is intriguing, and its effects on the course of CVS remain unknown. CVS lacks specific biomarkers and is diagnosed using Rome criteria. Unfortunately, patients continue to be misdiagnosed and to undergo significant delays in diagnosis, unnecessary investigations, and even futile surgery. This leads to both morbidity and high health-care costs. A high index of suspicion and the avoidance of unnecessary tests are important. Treatment of CVS is primarily empiric, and prophylactic therapy is indicated when episodes are very frequent or severe and interfere with the quality of life. First-line agents include TCAs, and anticonvulsants such as topiramate, zonisamide, or levetiracetam may be used if patients cannot tolerate TCAs or do not respond to therapy. Abortive therapy is helpful for preventing the progression of an episode, and triptans, antiemetics, and sedatives are commonly used. CVS is also associated with multiple comorbid conditions such as anxiety, depression, and autonomic dysfunction. These disorders should be treated concurrently and can improve overall health-care outcomes. Further studies on the epidemiology and pathophysiology of CVS are warranted and should aid the development of targeted therapies in the future.