Introduction
The first large series of patients with purported immune-mediated autonomic failure was published in 1994 as “idiopathic autonomic neuropathy” [ ]. Subsequently, the disease now known as autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy (AAG) has been well characterized. This disease typically presents with the acute or subacute onset of diffuse failure of the sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric systems, with relative or complete sparing of somatic nerve function [ , ]. Antibodies against the ganglionic acetylcholine receptor (gAChR) [ ] were shown to be pathologic using active immunization studies in rabbits and passive immunization in mice [ ]. Antibody levels in humans correlate with severity of disease [ , , , ]. Antibody-targeted therapies such as intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and plasma exchange (PE) are considered first-line treatments [ , ].
About half of patients with subacute diffuse autonomic failure are seropositive for gAChR antibodies [ ]. High antibody levels associate with prominent symptoms of cholinergic failure (sicca, abnormal pupillary response, gastrointestinal hypomotility, and neurogenic bladder) [ ] and sympathetic failure (anhidrosis and orthostatic hypotension) [ ]. Patients with low antibody levels may present with limited autonomic symptoms such as isolated orthostatic intolerance or gastrointestinal dysmotility [ , , ]. Compared to seronegative patients, patients with gAChR antibodies are more likely to have abnormal pupillary responses, sicca, constipation, subacute onset of symptoms, and abnormalities on cardiovagal testing [ ]. Seropositive patients also have a characteristic premature pupillary redilation in response to standard light stimulus [ ].
In this case series, we describe six patients with subacute onset of autonomic failure and negative gAChR antibodies. They showed phenotypic features and response to treatment indicating that this entity is distinct from AAG.
Methods
Six patients referred for autonomic evaluation between May 2011 and December 2015 were retrospectively identified. This study was approved by the IRB at UT Southwestern and all patients consented to participate. One (case 2) has previously been published elsewhere [ ]. All were evaluated with standard autonomic tests in our laboratory, including the quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test (QSART), assessment of cardiovagal heart rate response to deep breathing and Valsalva [ ], assessment of beat-to-beat blood pressure response during Valsalva and head-up tilt table testing, and quantitative pupillometry. The Composite Autonomic Severity Score (CASS) [ ] was calculated for each patient. All patients underwent serologic testing for gAChR antibodies in our laboratory in addition to various outside commercial laboratories.
Results
Six patients (ages 25–73, four male) presented with acute to subacute onset of autonomic failure. Testing for serum paraneoplastic antibodies and gAChR antibodies was negative in all cases, aside from a non-specific low-titer P/Q calcium channel antibody in case 2. Presentation and autonomic symptoms are summarized in Table 1 . One patient (case 6) had a history of prostate cancer, and another (case 4) reported preceding infection. Three patients (cases 2, 4, and 5) had positive anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) and history of other autoimmune conditions. Initial presenting symptoms included paresthesias, gastrointestinal complaints, and orthostatic hypotension (OH) or syncope. As the disease progressed, OH became a prominent feature, along with gastrointestinal complaints and urinary retention. Three patients complained of severe neuropathic pain (and sensory changes), which started distally but spread to most of the body and required multiple medications. Neurologic examination was normal for motor function and coordination. Details of reflexes, sensory examination, and other pertinent findings are summarized in Table 2 . Additional workup was performed as clinically indicated for each patient and in different cases included serum catecholamines, neuroimaging, full body imaging, nerve conduction studies and EMG, skin or nerve biopsies, and additional serologic studies. Details of the complete clinical workup are summarized in Table 3 . Table 1 Presentation and autonomic symptoms in the six cases Case Demographics Initial presentation (time from onset to our evaluation) OH Urinary symptoms GI symptoms Sicca symptoms Pain/sensory symptoms 1 26-Year-old male 2 months of abdominal pain, N/V, early satiety, 30 kg weight loss (2 months) Yes Retention Abdominal pain, N/V, gastroparesis, required J-tube Unknown Abdominal pain 2 26-Year-old female 3–4 weeks of sensitivity/pain in feet, body aches, night sweats, nausea, and OH (1 year) Yes No Bloating, nausea, constipation, required J-tube Dry mouth Painful paresthesias of extremities and face, decreased sensation right face and arms > legs 3 35-Year-old male Acute onset abdominal pain with paresthesias, urinary retention, and ileus (3.5 years) Yes (also supine HTN) Retention Ileus Dry eyes/mouth Very painful paresthesias of limbs ascending to face 4 37-Year-old female Preceding bronchitis, then 2 months later developed distal paresthesias, body aches, night sweats over 1 month (1 year) Yes Retention Diarrhea, intestinal hypomotility, early satiety Dry eyes/mouth Painful distal paresthesias ascended to whole body 5 65-Year-old male Syncope, followed by development of anhidrosis over the next 3 months (2.5 years) Yes No No Dry eyes Mild distal sensory loss in feet 6 73-Year-old male 2 months of syncope and OH (2 months) Yes No No None Chronic low back pain OH orthostatic hypotension, J-tube jejunostomy tube, N/V nausea and vomiting, HTN hypertension Table 2 Neurologic examination findings in the six patients Patient Deep tendon reflexes Large fiber sensation Small fiber sensation Other Case 1 Normal Normal Normal None Case 2 Normal in legs, diminished in arms Vibration decreased in arms > legs and L > R; proprioception decreased in L > R fingers Pinprick decreased in R face and BL arms L-sided Horner syndrome Case 3 Areflexic Vibration decreased length-dependent, proprioception decreased at toes Pinprick decreased in feet Mild toe extension weakness Case 4 Normal Normal Pinprick decreased diffusely except for face, neck, and feet Allodynia over anterior body Case 5 Diminished in ankles Vibration decreased at L toe Pinprick decreased over tops of feet L toe extension and ankle dorsiflexion weakness from chronic L5 radiculopathy Case 6 Diminished in ankles Vibration decreased at toes Normal None L left, R right, BL bilateral Table 3 Ancillary testing results Case Catecholamines (pg/ml) Paraneoplastic panel CSF Imaging EMG/NCS Pathology Additional serum studies 1 NE supine 220, standing 321 Negative ND CT C/A/P no e/o malignancy RNS normal ND B12, TSH, cortisol, ESR, CRP normal. Negative: ANA, ENA panel, TTG ab 2 NE supine 48, standing 62 Epi normal Negative except for P/Q VGCC = 0.08, “unclassified” ab identified ND MRI brain/spine normal, body PET no e/o malignancy Unremarkable Lip bx not c/w Sjogren’s Positive: ANA, SSA/SSB, RNP, ASO. Negative: anti-Smith, RF, CCP, ESR, ANCA, CRP 3 ND Negative Protein 250 mg/dl MRI brain normal Length-dependent, axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy Sural nerve bx: axonal loss, scattered inflammatory infiltrates Negative: GM1 ab, GD1b ab, SSA/SSB, TPO ab, TTG ab, GAD65 ab 4 ND Negative Protein 58 mg/dl MRI brain and cervical spine unremarkable, CT C/A/P and body PET no e/o malignancy Normal ND Positive: ANA Negative: ENA panel, anti-dsDNA 5 NE supine 94, no rise on standing Negative ND MRI brain small meningioma, MR cervical spine foraminal narrowing and prior surgery, CT C/A/P and body PET no e/o malignancy C7 and L5 radiculopathies, carpal tunnel syndrome, otherwise unremarkable Skin bx c/w CTD including lupus vs dermatomyositis Positive: ANA Negative: CA 125, CA 19-9, PSA, complements, ESR, CRP, RF, CCP, ENA panel, anti-dsDNA 6 Normal supine Negative Protein 60 mg/dl; negative for oligoclonal bands MRI brain, thoracic, lumbar spine unremarkable, CT C/A/P with abdominal and RP LN (metastases) ND Fat pad bx neg for amyloidosis, neck LN bx c/w prostate cancer B12, TSH, cortisol normal. Negative: SPEP/UPEP gAChR ab ganglionic acetylcholine receptor antibodies, NCS nerve conduction studies, ND not done, RNS repetitive nerve stimulation, NE norepinephrine, Epi epinephrine, VGCC voltage gated calcium channel antibodies, ab antibody, PET positron emission tomography, e/o evidence of, bx biopsy, c/w consistent with, RNP ribonucleoprotein antibody, ASO antistreptolysin O antibody, RF rheumatoid factor, CCP cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, ANCA anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, CRP C-reactive protein, TPO thyroid peroxidase, TTG tissue transglutaminase, C/A/P chest/abdomen/pelvis, CTD connective tissue disease, ENA extractable nuclear antigen antibodies, RP retroperitoneal, LN lymph node, TSH thyroid-stimulating hormone, SPEP serum protein electrophoresis, UPEP urine protein electrophoresis, ND not done
Autonomic testing (Table 4 ) revealed severe autonomic failure, which was predominantly sympathetic in five patients and diffuse in one. A representative Valsalva blood pressure response (Fig. 1 ) is shown from case 5. Orthostatic hypotension was severe, with an average of 58 mmHg drop in systolic blood pressure on head-up tilt table testing. Two patients (cases 1 and 4) had preservation of the heart rate increment in response to OH. QSART testing showed length-dependent deficits in four patients. Pupillometry was normal in three cases. Two others had mildly slowed constriction velocity, but none showed premature redilation. In fact, one patient (case 2) had a left-sided Horner syndrome, and another (case 6) had markedly slowed pupillary redilation, both indicative of sympathetic impairment. Table 4 Autonomic testing results and interpretation in the six cases Case QSART Cardiovagal (HR DB ) Cardiovagal (Valsalva ratio) Valsalva BP response (PRT) Tilt table testing (head-up tilt) Pupillometry CASS Interpretation 1 Reduced proximal leg and foot 10.1 bpm (nl ≥ 14) 1.5 (nl > 1.5) Abnormal (16 s) Supine: 115/83, 76 bpm HUT: 69/46, 117 bpm Normal 2 (sudomotor) 1 (cardiovagal) 4 (vasomotor) Diffuse autonomic dysfunction, sympathetic > parasympathetic 2 Absent R forearm, reduced L, absent distal leg and foot 8.7 bpm (nl ≥ 14) 1.28 (nl > 1.5) Abnormal (21 s) Supine: 163/87, 68 bpm HUT: 81/40, 86 bpm Mildly slowed constriction, L Horner 3 (sudomotor) 1 (cardiovagal) 4 (vasomotor) Severe, diffuse autonomic dysfunction, sympathetic > parasympathetic 3 Reduced forearm, proximal and distal leg, absent foot 3.0 bpm (nl ≥ 10) 1.03 (nl > 1.5) Abnormal (40 s) Supine 126/68, 91 bpm HUT: 77/34, 87 bpm Borderline slowed constriction 3 (sudomotor) 3 (cardiovagal) 4 (vasomotor) Severe, diffuse autonomic failure 4 Absent at proximal and distal leg, foot 14.2 bpm (nl ≥ 10) 1.72 (nl > 1.5) Abnormal (24 s) Supine: 92/61, 56 bpm HUT: 62/39, 100 bpm Normal 3 (sudomotor) 0 (cardiovagal) 4 (vasomotor) Severe sympathetic autonomic failure 5 Reduced proximal and distal leg, foot 3.2 bpm (nl ≥ 7) 1.28 (nl > 1.35) Abnormal (25 s) Supine: 153/93, 67 bpm HUT: 73/59, 82 bpm Normal constriction, large resting pupil 3 (sudomotor) 2 (cardiovagal) 4 (vasomotor) Severe, diffuse autonomic failure, sympathetic > parasympathetic 6 Reduced proximal leg, absent distal leg and foot 2.6 bpm (nl ≥ 7) 1.18 (nl > 1.35) Abnormal (30 s) Supine: 144/98, 85 bpm HUT: 81/55, 92 bpm Small pupils, slowed constriction, markedly slowed redilation 3 (sudomotor) 2 (cardiovagal) 4 (vasomotor) Severe, diffuse autonomic dysfunction, sympathetic > parasympathetic Fig. 1 Blood pressure and heart rate response to Valsalva maneuver (case 5). The top line represents heart rate (HR), the second line systolic blood pressure (SBP), and the third line diastolic blood pressure (DBP). The bottom line represents expiratory effort. This demonstrates an abnormal blood pressure response to Valsalva, with absent phase IIL recovery, prolonged pressure recovery time after the strain, and absent phase IV overshoot. A heart rate increase during Valsalva is preserved
Patients received various immunotherapies, often multiple courses (Table 5 ): five received plasma exchange (PE), four IVIG, three rituximab, three high-dose intravenous steroids, and four received oral steroid-sparing immunosuppressants. Clinical response was assessed symptomatically. Neither PE, IVIG, nor rituximab yielded much benefit. Three patients achieved remarkable effects with intravenous steroids, and two stabilized and improved slowly on oral immunosuppression. Table 5 Treatments and responses in seronegative autoimmune autonomic neuropathy Case (duration of follow-up) Treatment Response Case 1 (1 year) PE × 7 Minimal improvement of OH and nausea/vomiting Prednisone 20 mg qd + azathioprine 50 mg qd No benefit IVMP 1 g qd × 5 Improved OH and urinary retention, relapse upon discontinuation Prednisone 60 mg qd + azathioprine 50 mg BID Improved OH and gastroparesis Rituximab 1 g Self-discontinued prednisone and azathioprine, admitted with relapse 1 month later IVMP 1 g qd × 5 Improvement, then discharged and lost to follow-up. Admitted to a local hospital 6 months later with worsening symptoms but did not re-establish care with autonomic specialists Case 2 (3 years) Prednisone 60 mg qd + methotrexate (for pre-existing seronegative rheumatoid arthritis) No benefit PE × 5 No benefit IVIG × 3 days No benefit Rituximab × 1 dose No benefit IVIG 0.5 g/kg q2 weeks + hydroxychloroquine 200 mg qd Minimal improvement of gastrointestinal symptoms. No change in autonomic function testing at 1 year. Recovery of parasympathetic function at 1.5 years. At 3 years, improvement in sweat function and plasma catecholamines Case 3 (3.5 years) PE × 5 No benefit IVIG No benefit IVMP 1 g qd Improvement in urinary symptoms and orthostatic hypotension, some improvement of neuropathic pain Prednisone Return of symptoms IVMP 1 g qweek, then up to 1200 mg q5 days Improved urinary function, improved blood pressure control. Autonomic function testing 3 years after initial testing showed improved sweat volumes, otherwise unchanged Rituximab, total of 4 doses No change in symptoms or decrease in steroid requirements Case 4 (4 years) IV steroids (unclear dose) × 3 days, then prednisone + hydroxychloroquine + sulfasalazine Some improvement of distal dysesthesias and rash IVIG 2 g/kg divided over 5 days, then 0.4 g/kg weekly for 4 weeks Questionable benefit PE × 5 months (weekly, then tapered), with prednisolone 10 mg daily (then tapered) Questionable benefit Azathioprine and prednisolone 5 mg daily Some improvement of salivation and sweating by year one, and later improvement in OH, though unable to wean steroids Case 5 (4.5 years) Hydroxychloroquine 200 mg BID No benefit IVMP 1 g qweek × 12 weeks Improvement in OH that would wear off by the end of the week, repeat autonomic testing with marked improvement in sweat volume Mycophenolate mofetil 1000 mg BID + hydroxychloroquine 200 mg BID Stable and improved. Stopped mycophenolate after 1.5 years and remained stable Case 6 (3 months) IVIG 2 g/kg divided over 5 days No benefit PE × 5 sessions Questionable benefit symptomatically, no change in autonomic function testing Prednisone 20 mg qd × 1 week, then 10 mg qd thereafter Lost to follow-up PE plasma exchange, IVMP intravenous methylprednisolone, qd daily, BID twice daily, IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin
Illustrative cases
Case 1
A 26-year-old male presented with 2 months of vomiting, abdominal pain, urinary retention, sexual dysfunction, OH, and 30 kg weight loss. Paraneoplastic and gAChR antibodies were negative. Autonomic testing revealed diffuse autonomic failure with predominance of sympathetic deficits. Seven sessions of PE yielded minimal improvement in nausea and OH. Feeding intolerance necessitated placement of a gastrojejunal tube. He started prednisone 20 mg daily with azathioprine but was re-admitted 6 weeks later for worsening symptoms. Intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 5 days yielded notable improvement in OH and urinary retention. His symptoms relapsed upon discontinuation, so he was discharged with prednisone 60 mg daily plus azathioprine. There was sustained improvement in OH and gastroparesis. He received 1 g rituximab with appropriate decrement in CD19 count. He self-discontinued his oral medications 1 month later and was admitted with relapse of symptoms. Five days of intravenous steroids again yielded symptomatic benefit. He subsequently moved out of the country and was lost to further follow-up. He was admitted to a local hospital 6 months later with worsening symptoms but did not re-establish care with autonomic specialists.
Case 4
A 37-year-old female with a history of idiopathic urticarial rash presented with tingling fingertips after an episode of bronchitis; this improved initially with intravenous steroids. Symptoms progressed to diffuse aching, night sweats, burning, and sensitivity of the hands and feet (subsequently most of the body). Over a few weeks, she developed diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, dry mouth and eyes, and then urine and bowel retention. Over the next month, she developed orthostatic lightheadedness. She lost weight (more than 18 kg). Laboratory workup was negative for paraneoplastic and gAChR antibodies. CSF analysis was normal except for mildly elevated protein (58 mg/dl). Nerve conduction studies and electromyography were normal. Autonomic testing revealed severe sympathetic vasomotor failure and length-dependent post-ganglionic sudomotor impairment. Cardiovagal and pupillomotor functions were normal. She received IVIG 2 g/kg over 5 days followed by 0.4 g/kg per week and plasma exchange for 5 months (weekly, then tapered) with minimal benefit. She was transitioned to low-dose prednisone and azathioprine, with gradual improvement over months in OH, weight, salivation, and sweating.
Discussion
In these cases of autonomic failure, several features support an immune-mediated mechanism. These include acute to subacute onset, association with positive ANA and other autoimmune diseases, monophasic or relapsing course, and response (in some cases) to immunotherapy. However, they lack gAChR antibodies and demonstrate a number of key differences from seropositive AAG. AAG affects sympathetic and parasympathetic functions equally, as the causative antibody targets the ganglionic acetylcholine receptor, which is present in all autonomic ganglia. In AAG, cholinergic symptoms often dominate the clinical picture and pupillary constriction fatigue is a characteristic feature [ ]. Our patients, by contrast, had prominent orthostatic hypotension, with relatively fewer sicca and cardiovagal features. None of our patients demonstrated the premature redilation characteristic of AAG, and in fact some of the pupillary abnormalities were more suggestive of sympathetic failure.
Sensory symptoms are unusual in AAG; mild paresthesias are seen in 25% but are generally not prominent [ ]. Half of our patients had prominent sensory symptoms, including severe neuropathic pain and clinical large and small fiber sensory deficits. The sensory features, with distal-to-proximal progression of dysesthesias and a length-dependent pattern of sudomotor deficits, suggest a disease process involving peripheral small-fiber axons. Further support for a length-dependent axonal process comes from the two patients (cases 1 and 4) who had relative preservation of heart rate increment on tilt table testing; this suggests a length dependence of sympathetic dysfunction with relative preservation of the most proximal fibers innervating the heart. The non-length-dependent pattern of sensory deficits in case 2 could suggest pathology in the sensory ganglia. However, no abnormalities of the dorsal columns of the cervical spine were seen to support sensory neuron degeneration. Involvement of the autonomic ganglia also seems less likely given the predominance of sympathetic dysfunction (rather than balanced sympathetic and parasympathetic dysfunction) and the length-dependent QSART deficits.
Response to immunomodulatory therapies in these patients was quite different compared to typical AAG. PE and IVIG are considered first-line therapy for AAG [ ] as this is an antibody-mediated disorder. Our patients were treated (often repeatedly) with IVIG, PE, and even rituximab, with little effect. Many of the patients instead responded best to steroids, particularly at high intravenous doses. We considered that the intravenous volume and the hypertensive effects of steroids could have played a role in benefit. However, intravenous volume is also substantial with IVIG, which did not benefit our patients, and steroids helped with symptoms other than OH as well, such as urinary retention. The unique response to steroids in our patients suggests either a cell-mediated or inflammatory immune process rather than an antibody-mediated disorder.
Previous studies have reported similar patients with both autonomic and sensory failure, in some cases named “acute autonomic and sensory neuropathy.” Aside from one series of 21 patients [ ], these have been reports of individual cases heterogeneous in clinical presentation, extent of sensory involvement, autonomic failure, and response to treatment. Sensory involvement in these reports ranged from predominantly small-fiber symptoms (including neuropathic pain) with minimal electrophysiologic changes [ , , , , ] to more diffuse sensory impairment, sometimes with sensory ataxia [ , , , , , ]. Most cases did note pupillary dysfunction on bedside examination. Several cases were closely associated with identified viral infections, including Epstein-Barr virus [ ] and herpes simplex virus [ ]; one case was associated with testicular cancer [ ], and another case was associated with interferon therapy for hepatitis C [ ]. CSF protein was often elevated. Sural nerve biopsies were performed in some patients and often showed loss of small myelinated and unmyelinated fibers [ , , , , , ]. In cases that had advanced imaging or went to autopsy, abnormalities of the dorsal root ganglia or dorsal columns of the spinal cord were noted [ , , ]. Recovery was often incomplete. Patients received courses of IVIG, PE, oral steroids, and intravenous steroids with varying responses [ , , , , ].
Since most of these reports took place before the availability of gAChR antibody testing, it is unclear where our patients fit in with these cases. Only one of our patients recalled a preceding illness, which was reported in most of these cases; our patients may not have recalled a mild viral illness at their evaluation months or years later or may have had an alternate trigger for their immune system (as three had previously diagnosed autoimmune conditions). Moreover, these previous cases also did not have autonomic function quantified in the same manner as our patients, so it is unclear whether the pattern of autonomic failure was similar.
A recent case report [ ] described a 57-year-old patient with slowly progressive, sympathetic noradrenergic failure, negative for ganglionic antibodies and also lacking the alpha-synuclein pathology expected in pure autonomic failure. This patient was also noted to have length-dependent sensory deficits on neurologic examination. The sympathetic failure and sensory deficits bear some resemblance to our cases; however, the gradual, continual progression is more suggestive of a neurodegenerative process than the subacute course seen in our patients, consistent with autoimmune pathology. Furthermore, this patient’s QSART was normal, whereas it was markedly abnormal in all our cases.
Conclusion
Seronegative autoimmune autonomic and sensory neuropathy is clinically distinct from AAG. This condition appears to be an autoimmune disorder based on mode of onset and response to steroids, but the notable lack of response to antibody-targeted therapies suggests that this is an inflammatory rather than an antibody-mediated disorder. The pattern of autonomic deficits is different from AAG, with predominant sympathetic failure and lack of the characteristic pupillary findings of AAG. This distinct autoimmune autonomic disorder should be differentiated from other forms of subacute autonomic failure, as treatment with steroids appears to be most effective.