Introduction
Nerves form a fundamental means of communication either among neural networks or between different organs. From the first suggestion by Galen (130–216 AD) that the ganglionated nerves of the sympathetic cord enabled “functional unity, or physiological sympathy”, among the internal organs [ ], we now understand the nature of the sympathetic nervous system to serve a critical role in acute and chronic homeostatic adjustments to stress through its ability to relay information to every organ and thereby actuate an appropriate end-organ response. For example, the sympathetic control of cardiovascular function represents a key determinant of blood pressure regulation through moment-by-moment adjustments in vascular contractile state, venous capacitance, and cardiac function. Microneurographic measures of muscle sympathetic nerve activity (MSNA) indicate that the neural inputs to the cardiovascular outcomes are titrated to the magnitude of the stress. However, the ability of the central nervous system to titrate and communicate specific stress responses within the sympathetic nervous system remains poorly understood, although hints have been provided, as outlined below. Further, it seems reasonable to consider the possibility that MSNA, as a neural system, contains a structured communication model. Certainly, the idea of coded information within neural systems has been considered in the context of the sensory systems [ , , ] and neuromuscular control [ ]. However, the study of language used by the sympathetic nervous system to communicate messages among organs remains at its infancy. This brief review focuses on recent efforts to probe the language of the sympathetic nervous system, addressing the question of whether MSNA represents a simple and graded all-or-none pattern, or whether subtext exists within complex recruitment strategies. Beginning with hypothetical ideas generated from observing the integrated neurogram, this review explores recent methods from our laboratory to study action potential (AP) content within MSNA under baseline and reflexive conditions in both health and disease. The review focuses on the following: (1) the importance of burst size, (2) action potential detection methods, (3) evidence for recruitment patterns, (4) reflex specific recruitment patterns, and (5) clinical implications.
Hints inferred from the integration neurogram: importance of MSNA burst size
The earliest inclinations regarding the existence of possible recruitment strategies in MSNA come from the integrated neurogram. Adrian and colleagues, in 1932, were the first to report mammalian efferent sympathetic recordings [ ]. Modifications of microneurographic techniques reported in 1968 enabled the novel study of multi-unit recordings in peripheral human nerves [ ]. These early studies noted the “bursty” nature of efferent sympathetic nervous system (SNS), which had a low signal-to-noise aspect that challenged quantification. Thus, early practices focused on a processing approach that rectified and integrated the neurogram to produce greater resolution of these bursts [ , , , ]. This processing exposed not only the burstiness of this signal, but also the idea that such bursts vary in terms of their frequency and size. Figure 1 illustrates this point in a human recording. Uniquely, the MSNA bursts are entrained to the cardiac cycle by baroreflex mechanisms [ ]. This entrainment appears to be a fundamental aspect of the signal, not only in the signal’s shape, but in its function in neurovascular control as well. Specifically, stimulating the cut end of feline postganglionic lumbar sympathetic nerves [ ] illustrated that the greatest vasoconstrictor effect occurred when the nerves were stimulated in pulses that mimicked the in vivo bursty nature of this signal. The burst frequency metric of MSNA provides within-individual reproducibility on repeated measures [ ], although inter-individual variations are large [ ]. Therefore, this practice of studying the frequency of bursts has become what some call the “standard” model of assessment of overall efferent sympathetic outflow in human studies [ ]. Fig. 1 An individual’s tracing of electrocardiogram (ECG) and the muscle sympathetic nerve activity (SNA) neurogram in both the raw (rectified and band-pass filtered 0.2–3 kHz) and integrated forms
A problem with the singular focus on burst frequency is the exclusion of other features of the integrated MSNA neurogram that infer the presence of more complex neurophysiology and end-organ control. Primarily, the variations in the size of the bursts in the integrated signal are poorly regarded in the literature. Technically, the concept of burst size is difficult to trust and understand. For example, uncertainties regarding the stability of electrode position within the human sympathetic nerve bundles, and the number of axons that may contribute to the burst morphology, have discouraged the study of burst size. Normalizing the burst size overcomes this problem in a relative sense, on the assumption that the electrode position is stable. Importantly, in stable recordings, burst size exhibits strong reproducibility when assessed as a distribution of normalized burst sizes [ ]. Thus, burst size appears to be a metric of MSNA outflow, although less quantifiable than burst frequency.
A second factor limiting the use of burst size in understanding MSNA control comes out of the practice of integrating the raw neurogram, effectively removing all information regarding the content of the underlying raw signal. Specifically, the size of integrated MSNA bursts reflects the number (and size) of action potentials (APs) synchronized at that point in time [ ]. Therefore, variations in burst size must reflect variations in AP recruitment as determined by the number and/or size of underlying APs. Further, evidence that the frequency of preganglionic nerve stimulation directly determines the size of the postganglionic compound action potential (synonymous with burst size in the integrated neurogram) [ , , ] indicates that postganglionic AP recruitment patterns will provide insight into central determinants of efferent sympathetic outflow. These features are supported by anatomical arrangements in peripheral nerves. Specifically, histological analysis of human cadaver fibular nerves has exposed the bundled nature of sympathetic C-fibers in peripheral nerves [ ]. Many such bundles reside within each fascicle, and these comprise 1–45 axons, with axons varying in size from 0.5 to 2.0 μm. Such arrangements provide the anatomical possibility for variations in AP patterns and recruitment strategies.
In addition to anatomical considerations, several functional outcomes illustrate the importance of burst size, and the underlying determinants of burst size, as an important variable in MSNA quantification. For example, the upward resetting of baroreflex control over total sympathetic outflow in a hypovolemic condition was explained solely by the presence of greater normalized burst size [ ]. Further, changes in burst size predict sex differences in response to graded head-up tilt. Specifically, males increased MSNA to a greater extent than females due to elevations in both burst frequency and burst size, whereas females only increased burst frequency [ ]. As a final example, larger bursts are associated with larger leg vasoconstrictor responses in humans, under baseline conditions [ ]. Thus, burst size exhibits unique features of the MSNA signal with important functional correlates.
Beyond the features described above, a relationship between burst size and its timing has led to significant hypotheses regarding recruitment strategies in MSNA. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 2 , larger bursts exhibit shorter conduction transit times to the recording electrode, with the major difference observed in the leading edge of the integrated neurogram [ ]. Wallin and colleagues observed this pattern and hypothesized the existence of two primary recruitment strategies within the MSNA neurogram. The first was variations in synaptic delays that could lead to temporal coding of active neurons. The second was recruitment of a latent subpopulation of fast-conducting axons in some bursts, an example of population coding. A third possibility could be the more frequent recruitment of active fibres such that their integrated activity summed to a greater amplitude, a rate coding effect. However, this latter effect would be expected to influence the slope of the rising edge of the burst rather than the earlier arrival of the signal. The only way to test these hypotheses was to study the behavior of APs in the multi-unit recording; however, the integrated neurogram removes this information. In 1994, Macefield and Wallin [ ] reported the ability to interrogate a single neuron over time. These investigators demonstrated that the careful positioning of higher-impedance microelectrodes (e.g., 10 MΩ) would expose a dominant AP that could be tracked over time. The conclusion that this AP represented the same axon was supported by the similar morphology of the APs. This technique enabled the study of AP probabilities under many conditions [ , , , , , ]. Generally, a single axon fires once per burst but with varying latencies within a burst [ ]. Importantly, it was determined that the dramatic increase in integrated burst size during an apnea could not be explained by a greater rate of recruitment of this single AP. These authors concluded, therefore, that recruitment of latent APs may occur to account for the larger burst size [ ]. Inasmuch as the single AP technique minimizes activity of other axons, new methods were needed to interrogate all APs in each burst simultaneously. Fig. 2 Integrated bursts of muscle sympathetic nerve activity overlaid as a function of their latency from the corresponding R-wave of the electrocardiogram (ECG). Note the shorter latency of larger bursts and the homology in left and right leg recordings
Action potential detection in MSNA
It was not until the early part of the twenty-first century that sophisticated signal processing techniques were applied to the problem of dissecting out the many APs that constitute the multi-unit MSNA recording. Two fundamental approaches have been reported that address this problem. These include wavelet de-noising [ , , , ] and a mixed separation template matching model [ ]. Following the earlier work of Diedrich [ ], who used the MATLAB Symlet 7 wavelet, Salmanpour et al. [ , , ] developed a new wavelet modeled from human APs to increase detection resolution. The details of this wavelet’s construction and validation are provided elsewhere [ , , ]. Very briefly, our approach enables identification of the exact location of every matched AP in the recording such that it can be extracted and replotted outside of the noise. At this point, the “rate coding” patterns of the multi-unit recording can be quantified if the multi-unit recording’s spike representation is treated as a spike train. We extended the analytical process beyond the detection stage to further classify the APs into clusters of similarly-shaped APs using a K-means approach, and to detect their timing within the burst relative to the R-wave of the cardiac cycle that generated the systolic pulse that effectively turned off the burst. Thus, the occurrence (rate coding), recruitment (population coding), and timing (temporal coding) of APs could be considered. Of note, this approach provides information on how similarly-shaped APs behave over time; the method infers no information regarding single axon behavior.
With this approach, AP patterns as a function of burst size can be studied under many circumstances, such as baseline (Fig. 3 ) and a prolonged apnea performed at total lung capacity (Fig. 4 ). The high probability of small APs, and lower probability of larger APs, becomes the first pattern to emerge from these displays. However, as shown in Fig. 4 , a new pattern emerges in the reflex state, where APs are now present that were not present at baseline. This is a manifestation of a recruitment response. The fact that these larger recruited APs display a faster conduction velocity (Fig. 5 ) illustrates a fundamental property of “cable theory” whereby larger-diameter axons are expected to conduct the AP at a faster rate. The observations that new APs emerge in a reflexive state, and that these APs are both larger and faster-conducting, indicate that they represent a subpopulation of higher-threshold axons with larger diameter, not simply axons that are closer to the electrode. Fig. 3 The relationship between the occurrence of individual action potential clusters as a function of burst amplitude in one subject. The top panel shows diastolic blood pressure (DBP) for each respective burst. Integrated sympathetic bursts are ordered by burst size ( second panel ), where 100% represents the average burst size. Below the sympathetic burst size, occurrences of post-ganglionic sympathetic action potentials as a function of integrated burst size are indicated for each action potential cluster, organized sequentially along the left. The probability of each action potential occurring per burst is provided for each action potential at the right of the figure. Note that large action potential clusters are predominately recruited at larger bursts with low firing probability. Dotted line represents the average burst size Fig. 4 The relationship between the occurrence of individual action potential clusters as a function of burst amplitude in one subject over the course of a maximal apnea performed at total lung capacity. Integrated sympathetic bursts are ordered by burst size, where 100% represents the average burst height at baseline. Dotted lines demark the entire pre-apnea baseline period, with the middle line representing the average baseline burst size. The bottom panel illustrates occurrences of post-ganglionic sympathetic action potentials as a function of integrated burst size, indicated for each action potential cluster. Clusters are organized sequentially along the left. Two important features are noted. First, action potentials present at baseline increase firing probability during the reflex. Second, new action potentials become evident during the reflex as evidence of recruitment. Adapted from [ ] Fig. 5 The relationship between action potential size and that cluster’s latency. The hyperbolic relationship indicates faster conduction velocity for the larger action potential clusters, suggesting that the larger action potentials do not simply arise from axons that reside closer to the recording electrode. From [ ]
An interesting problem in dealing with the integrated neurogram is that burst frequency, but not burst size, represents considerable linkage to baroreflex control [ ]. Given the tendency for small AP presence in every burst, but larger AP presence in larger bursts, we tested the hypothesis that only smaller APs are under tight baroreflex modulatory control, whereas larger APs represent a different control feature. Indeed, we observed that smaller APs exhibited strong associations with diastolic blood pressure, with significant slopes, whereas larger APs demonstrated poor sensitivity to diastolic blood pressure [ ]. Thus, although the baroreflex appears to gate the presence of all APs, only the frequency of smaller APs appears to express sensitivity to pressure-dependent stimuli.
Reflex-specific control of sympathetic action potentials
Action potential recruitment patterns have now been characterized in several reflex states, some of which also incorporate a cognitive or “volitional” component. In these characterization studies, we examined the frequency of APs, the number of AP clusters, and the timing of these clusters (i.e., their latency). During graded lower body negative pressure, an increase in firing of low-threshold APs (i.e., those APs present under baseline conditions) occurs first and, when severe enough, recruitment of new APs occurs [ ]. Of note, inter-individual variability exists in the level of lower body suction required to elicit the recruitment of new APs, although most individuals provide such expression if they tolerate levels of vacuum above −80 mmHg. This theme exists in all reflexes. For example, during prolonged apneas, either at functional residual capacity or total lung capacity, recruitment of new large APs occurs as the stress approaches the apneic break point [ ]. During sustained isometric handgrip, rate coding of existing APs occurs in the early moments of the exercise, but larger APs appear as fatigue develops [ ]. These exercise-recruited APs persist during a post-exercise period of forearm ischemia, illustrating the important role of the peripheral muscle metaboreceptors in the recruitment process. We interpret these observations to indicate that a latent population of larger, higher-threshold, and fast-conducting APs exist, to be recruited under conditions of severe stress.
To study the possibility of temporal coding patterns in MSNA, we studied AP latency, reflecting an index of overall conduction from the point of central recruitment to detection at the electrode. As noted above in Fig. 5 , displaying AP latency as a function of AP cluster size provides a hyperbolic relationship (with variability) whereby large APs have shorter latency, indicating greater conduction velocity. Thus, a change in the shape or placement of this curve could be interpreted as a shift in synaptic coupling or central recruitment of one or more AP clusters, as first suggested by Wallin [ ]. A unique and unexpected observation was a shift in the latency of all APs when the reflex incorporates some volitional effort to sustain the stimulus that is used to elicit the reflex MSNA response (Fig. 6 ). Further, the direction of this shift seems to express some reflex specificity. For example, in apnea taken to the volitional break point, the latency of all APs shortens [ ]. It may be considered that the driver in this case is chemoreflex stress. A Valsalva that incorporates both baroreflex and “apneic” elements also produces a “faster” conduction of all AP clusters [ ]. Similarly, AP latency becomes shorter in volitional fatiguing handgrip, but not during post exercise muscle ischemia used to sustain the peripheral reflex component in the absence of central or volitional effort [ ]. In contrast, severe lower body negative pressure causes either little change, or a lengthening of the AP latency profile [ ]. A common feature of the scenarios wherein AP latency shortens is the perceptual aspect of the stress—defined so far in these early studies as the sincere wish that the stress would end, perhaps against a background of chemoreflex drive. These data suggest the hypothesis that some aspect of perceptual effort also contributes uniquely to the synaptic delays associated with efferent MSNA AP recruitment. Fig. 6 Impact of a maximal apnea on latency of action potential clusters normalized to the maximal cluster size observed in the apnea phase. Shorter latencies in all action potential clusters during the apnea suggest that a reduction in synaptic delays occurred somewhere in the pathway from central nervous system to the recording electrode. From [ ]
These ideas that effortful maneuver contribute to burst latency are reminiscent of earlier data from sleep studies. In particular, REM sleep appears to induce rapid and complex fluctuations in autonomic function that include abrupt increases in sympathetic traffic to peripheral blood vessels [ ]. Specifically, large-amplitude K-complexes in the electroencephalogram measured during stage 2 of REM sleep often were associated with large bursts in MSNA [ , ] with shortened latency [ , ]. In each case, the changes in MSNA were independent of baroreflex stimuli, leading to the conclusion that arousal during sleep induces this short-term increase in MSNA outflow. The ideas that burst size and latency are modified by perceptual effort in awake humans, and arousal in sleeping humans, seem to align and point to an important role of the cerebral cortex in these modifications.
Clinical implications
A common feature of cardiovascular disease is chronically elevated sympathetic outflow. Heightened sympathetic drive is a hallmark of congestive heart failure [ ]. Baseline burst frequency also increases in patients following a cardiac event [ , ]. In many individuals, baseline MSNA burst frequency also increases with age [ , ]. Currently, there is little information regarding why or how sympathetic outflow increases in these states. Important to the discussion of recruitable systems, however, are the various roles played by rate coding or recruitment aspects of MSNA AP neural coding in these scenarios. Using the single-neuron method, different groups demonstrated that heightened levels of baseline MSNA in clinical states such as obesity, heart failure, and sleep apnea [ , , ] reflect only a modest increase in probability of the firing rate of single axons. Furthermore, we have observed a greater number of APs/burst in patients with chronic heart failure compared to similarly aged controls [ ]. Thus, low-threshold axons observable under baseline conditions are recruited more frequently, suggesting the contribution of a rate coding mechanism. Further, if chronically elevated MSNA reflects a reduced threshold for recruitment of larger MSNA axons, then it would be expected that APs of varying sizes (i.e., more clusters in our analysis) should be present under baseline conditions. Evidence supporting this possibility may be found in observations of higher numbers of active clusters per burst in patients with chronic heart failure compared to similarly aged controls [ ]. Such a shift in recruitment threshold might suggest that a recruitment ceiling is being approached in the cases of heightened baseline MSNA such that reflexive subpopulation recruitment would be minimized. To date, examinations of this latter hypothesis are limited and disparate. Compared to young healthy individuals, older healthy individuals express higher baseline MSNA burst frequency but little change in the number of APs per burst [ ]. Moreover, compared to these older individuals, patients treated for ischemic heart disease expressed a near-absent ability to recruit larger APs during apneas of similar length [ ]. These data suggest that the elevated baseline MSNA with aging and ischemic heart disease does, in fact, limit the potential to recruit new axons. To further study this question, we have explored AP patterns within the very large MSNA bursts that occur following a pre-ventricular contraction (PVC) in the unique case of patients with chronic heart failure (CHF). In a single study [ ], both controls and patients with CHF demonstrated increased AP frequency and number of active clusters in the post-PVC burst; however, the increase in burst integral, AP frequency, and APs per burst during the post-PVC burst was smaller in patients (Fig. 7 ). Nonetheless, the PVC-induced increase in active clusters per burst was similar between the groups. Thus, these CHF patients retained the ability to recruit larger APs in the severe stress of a pre-ventricular control but had a diminished ability to increase overall AP content. Although few studies are available, these data suggest that elevated baseline MSNA in various patient groups reflects a reduction in recruitment threshold and encroachment upon a ceiling effect for further recruitment during severe stress. Given our evidence that the severity of the stress seems to impact recruitment, additional studies are required to determine the stimulus–response relationships associated with rate and population coding (recruitment) options available with the MSNA system in these patient groups. Fig. 7 Occurrence of postganglionic sympathetic action potentials (APs) for each AP cluster as a function of burst size in bursts occurring during sinus rhythm and following a pre-ventricular contraction (PVC) in a control older adult ( A and C ) and a participant with chronic heart failure ( B and D ). A and B provide the integrated and filtered raw muscle sympathetic nerve activity tracings of the respective sinus rhythm and post-PVC bursts used to display the range of integrated sympathetic bursts ordered by burst size as a percentage of baseline ( C and D , top ), together with the occurrence of postganglionic sympathetic action potentials as a function of integrated burst size for each action potential cluster ( C and D , bottom ). Dashed lines represent the mean of integrated burst sizes ( horizontal ) and corresponding action potential cluster range ( drop lines ). In both subjects, clusters of larger amplitude are predominantly recruited in the post-PVC burst. From [ ]
Conclusions
Hypotheses regarding the existence of recruitment strategies in MSNA, suggested in 1994 by Wallin and colleagues [ ], are supported in recent wavelet-based analytical methods. These recent observations indicate that multiple strategies exist for modification of efferent MSNA outflow. First, baseline variations in burst size are due to variations in the number of APs, but also the variable presence of larger APs with a low firing probability. Second, during reflex maneuvers, low-stress levels of the reflex engage a more frequent activation of APs already recruited at baseline. As the reflex continues, new APs appear that are larger and faster-conducting, and their probability appears to scale with the severity of the stress. This is a recruitment process of a latent subpopulation of recruitable axons. Third, a shift in the latency of all APs, possibly reflective of synaptic delays, occurs particularly when there is a significant perceptual straining or volitional component to the reflex maneuver. Based on these data, the sympathetic nervous system has several options when it comes to modifying efferent outflow.