Introduction
Vasovagal syncope (VVS) is a clinical manifestation of the vasovagal reflex, characterized by the occurrence of hypotension and bradycardia. The mechanism of the vasovagal reflex is not completely understood. Very little is known about the afferent part of the vasovagal reflex (i.e., the step from trigger to autonomic control and central processing), whereas the efferent part of the reflex seems to have been elucidated: in most studies [ , , , , ], with some exceptions [ ], hypotension appeared to be secondary to transient inhibition of the sympathetic system and bradycardia to a transient increase in vagal tone; both are generally preceded by an increase in sympathetic activity. Hypotension and bradycardia are responsible for transient loss of consciousness (TLoC) as a result of global cerebral hypoperfusion. VVS can be typical or non-typical [ ]. Typical VVS is diagnosed when TLoC is precipitated by an emotional trigger (fear, threat, disgust, pain, emotional distress, blood phobia) or an orthostatic one (prolonged standing) and is associated with autonomic prodromes (pallor, sweating, nausea, abdominal discomfort) [ ]. In about 80% of subjects with emotional VVS, TLoC can be induced even during orthostatic stress (tilt testing) [ ]. Non-typical VVS includes episodes of TLoC without any evident trigger and without (or only minimal) autonomic prodromes and can be diagnosed when TLoC is induced during tilt testing in the absence of other competing diagnosis [ ]. Typical VVS is benign, generally starts at young age, and the natural history is extremely variable [ ]. The prevalence of typical VVS has been little investigated and the few studies dealing with this issue offer contrasting results. The most likely explanations for the contrasting results appear to be differences in population, case definition, and case ascertainment. Moreover, observational studies showed that about half of the subjects with an episode of syncope do not seek medical attention because an episode of TLoC is generally considered to be innocent, particularly by young subjects [ , ]. For this reason, and considering the high prevalence of retrograde amnesia in subjects with VVS (about 30% after tilt-induced syncope) [ ], it is very likely that middle-aged and old subjects forget episodes of TLoC which occurred in young age. Although there is potential underestimation, the prevalence of VVS was rather high, about 30–40%, when investigated in young subjects [ , , , , , ]. Ganzeboom et al. [ ] investigated the distribution of triggers and reported that in about 40% of young VVS subjects the trigger was emotional. In the medical community, VVS is often regarded as a disease. That is probably true for VVS starting in old age, which is generally non-typical and frequently associated with other autonomic disturbances, mainly carotid sinus hypersensitivity [ , , ]. In other words, VVS beginning in old people seems to be related to the emergence of a pathological process of the autonomic nervous system, not yet defined in nosology or, more in general, to aging [ , ], even if the efferent pathways leading to hypotension and bradycardia appear to be the same as in subjects with typical VVS. By contrast, extensive evidence suggests that typical VVS is not a disease; this issue has been previously discussed [ ]. Some authors, who did not consider typical VVS as a disease but rather an evolutionary selected trait, hypothesized this type of syncope as a “defense mechanism” for the organism and a few theories have been postulated [ , , , , ].
Human violent conflicts theory
The human violent conflicts theory was postulated by Bracha et al. [ ]; under this hypothesis, the VVS evolved during the Paleolithic era only in the human lineage. In this evolutionary period, research has documented extensive intragroup warfare; a predominant cause of death was wounding by a sharp object. As expressed by Bracha, “it is unlikely that most non-combatants (females and pre-pubertal children) could outrun an adversary. Hence, the few non-combatants who inherited the “paradoxical” fainting response at the first sight of a sharp object or blood (blood phobia) now possess a survival advantage”. In this regard, blood phobia is more frequent in adolescents and females and decreases with age. Moreover, patients with blood phobia have a propensity to faint in the phobic situation; this propensity is not found with other specific phobias [ ]. These observations could explain the occurrence of emotional VVS, but since vasovagal reflex occurs in humans also during orthostatic stress, one should assume that two selective forces independently drove the evolution of the same physiological response; this is clearly an unlikely process. It has been reported that blood phobia patients hyperventilate during exposure to a relevant stimulus, mainly because of deeper rather than fasting breathing [ , ]. Hyperventilation has been observed even during tilt testing 2–3 min before onset of syncope [ ]. Hyperventilation is a response to stress and a symptom of anxiety state, and its role in the induction of syncope is a matter of some debate. Changes in respiration lead to hypocapnia, potentially responsible for cerebral vasoconstriction and, consequently, of TLoC. However, hypocapnia could be a facilitating factor but it is well known that hyperventilation alone does not reproduce TLoC in subjects with history of VVS. Page [ ] suggested that the combination of fear with a strong disgust response predisposes patients with blood phobia to develop VVS and the purpose of TLoC is the avoidance of contamination and illness that may arise from contact with blood and/or certain animal species. However, this hypothesis does not explain the appearance of VVS during orthostatic stress.
Clot production theory
The clot production theory, postulated by Diehl [ ], suggests that the vasovagal reflex is a defense mechanism against hemorrhage in mammals. During bleeding traumas, the vasovagal reflex appears to be mainly due to thoracic hypovolemia (see below). The reduction of blood pressure (BP) induced by this reflex would increase the coagulation system’s chance of producing a clot, thus arresting the loss of blood. This theory is based on the observation that hypertension worsens bleeding and that the normalization of BP by liquid infusion in patients with bleeding trauma can be harmful, impairing the formation of clots [ ]. According with this hypothesis, lowering the BP could reduce blood loss until stable blood clotting takes place. However, an important fact argues against the clot production theory: there are no data demonstrating that circulation shutdown prevents death from bleeding, and, on the contrary, the vasovagal reflex occurs in mammals after about 30% drop in blood volume [ ], when the chance of survival is extremely low in the absence of therapeutic intervention [ ].
Psychological defense theory
Engel and Romano [ ] suggested that emotional VVS would actually serve the purpose of keeping the overwhelming experience of threat or pain out of the subject’s awareness and thus would serve as a psychological defense mechanism to maintain stability. In other words, emotional VVS could be considered a means to escape temporarily from an intolerable world. Subsequently Engel [ ] argued that VVS involves a diphasic reaction comprising a fight–flight and a conservative-withdrawal response and emphasized that rather than a systematic progression from one response to another, physiological control is disorganized. When an organism experiences a novel danger, when environmental circumstances prohibit a rapid response (e.g., physical restraint), or when past experience has taught the futility of a certain response, a condition of unresolvable uncertainty exists. The uncertainty should be responsible for the disorganized autonomic response observed during VVS. Graham et al. [ ] interpreted the emotional VVS as a stage in which the initial fight–flight response, or anxiety, cedes and the initiated reflex pattern is suddenly unopposed (cessation of sympathetic activity which leads to exaggerated vagal effects). The authors speculated that emotional VVS may resemble an exaggerated relief response or giving-up reaction, in other words that the vagal activity is triggered by psychological factors, in particular hopelessness. The aforementioned considerations appear to be very interesting, but cannot explain the occurrence of orthostatic VVS. In this regard, about half of the subjects with typical VVS reported different triggers for different episodes [ , ] and, in the majority of subjects with history of emotional VVS, TLoC can be induced even during tilt testing [ ]. Even if the effects of psychological stimuli cannot be excluded in some subjects during tilt testing, the occurrence of orthostatic VVS (triggered by thoracic hypovolemia) is largely demonstrated [ , ]. Therefore, the purpose of typical VVS does not appear to be an escape from a dreadful situation or from a specific psychological condition.
Heart defense theory
Some years ago, Alboni et al. [ ] carried out an extensive bibliographic research on the vasovagal reflex in animals, including humans. Two processes, which appear to be relevant for the investigation of VVS evolution, were found in vertebrates: alarm bradycardia during tonic immobility in animals and vasovagal reflex during severe hemorrhage both in animals and humans.
Alarm bradycardia in animals
When an animal is attacked by another animal, the most common response is active, the so-called fight-or-flight response. In contrast to this active response, many animals can show a passive response to fear/threat by remaining motionless, the so-called tonic immobility, above all when attacked by predators from which there is not possibility of escape. During tonic immobility, which is a reflex and involuntary response, the animal typically assumes a recumbent posture to achieve the lowest body profile. The animal is alert, as shown by electroencephalographic recordings [ ], but in a state of catatonic-like reduced responsiveness which simulates the death. The evolution of tonic immobility as an anti-predator behavior alternative to fight-or-flight to increase the chances of survival was first suggested by Charles Darwin [ ]. For example, in situations where the animal has been caught by a predator, pretending to be dead can increase the possibilities to escape in an unguarded moment. Moreover, in many predators the clues causing them to hunt or kill are not the same as those causing them to eat. For prey, tonic immobility can help avoid triggering the predator’s killing and eating behavior. Some experimental studies showed that the survival rate was indeed increased by this behavior [ , , ]. Tonic immobility is not commonly observed in primates or in carnivores. One aspect of tonic immobility appears to be relevant for the investigation of VVS evolution: the appearance of alarm bradycardia, which is a paradoxical response since the expected one in a very stressful situation (an animal suddenly attacked by a predator) is an acceleration of heart rate (HR). Actually, there is an initial acceleration of HR, as an expression of sympathetic activity, followed by a marked decrease in HR. The prevalence in the various animal species of alarm bradycardia during tonic immobility is unknown. Extensive evidence, however, suggests that transient episodes of this phenomenon, documented by using a telemetric system, are common in many species of all the classes of vertebrates (fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals) [ , , , , , , , ]. The decrease in HR is very variable from subject to subject; sinus pauses longer than 3 s or transient episodes of second- or third-degree atrioventricular block have sometimes been observed [ , ]. Alarm bradycardia has been widely investigated in the opossum, a mammal living in South America [ ]. During tactile stimulation by a dog, the opossum reacts with tonic immobility; respiratory rate is reduced by about 30% and HR by about 50%. Other signs of vagal activation such as salivation, urination, and defecation can be present. The animal is conscious, though looking dead, and at this point the dog loses interest in the potential prey, moves away and the opossum’s HR gradually increases. The experiment was repeated after atropine administration. When the dog approached the opossum, the animal displayed tonic immobility, but alarm bradycardia was not observed. That means that tonic immobility and alarm bradycardia are two different reflexes and that alarm bradycardia is mediated by the vagal system. Unfortunately, BP has not been measured during alarm bradycardia in the context of tonic immobility, possibly because of limited availability of continuous BP measurements. This is a weak point in the analysis and interpretation of the vasovagal reflex. However, some decades ago, Adams et al. [ ] investigated the behavior and the cardiovascular changes in a carnivore, the cat, during an emotional situation, i.e., when preparing to fight in response to an attack by another cat. In addition to HR, they measured intra-arterial BP. Just before the attack, the cats were immobile, but tonic immobility was not displayed. Electrocardiographic recordings showed in some individuals a marked slowing of HR associated with a sudden decrease in BP, as an expression of withdrawal of the sympathetic system. This appears to be a clear demonstration of an emotional vasovagal reflex in the animal, outside tonic immobility. It must be underlined that all the animals mentioned above do not lose consciousness during alarm bradycardia.
There are similarities between alarm bradycardia in animals and emotional VVS in humans: (1) the same trigger (fear/threat) evokes the same type of response (bradycardia); (2) both emotional VVS in humans and alarm bradycardia in animals are more frequent in young individuals than in older ones [ , , ]; (3) both emotional VVS in humans and alarm bradycardia in animals are generally preceded by acceleration of HR, as an expression of increased sympathetic activity [ , , , , , , ]; (4) the few available data suggest that alarm bradycardia is associated with a decrease in BP, as during emotional VVS in humans.
Vasovagal reflex during severe hemorrhage in animals
The vasovagal reflex during severe hemorrhage has been observed in mammals such as rats, rabbits, cats, dogs and monkeys, as well in humans [ , , , , , , , ] and it appears to be due to thoracic hypovolemia which triggers afferent stimuli from the cardiopulmonary system. The hemodynamic response to acute thoracic hypovolemia consists of two phases. During the first phase, BP is maintained in the face of falling cardiac output by baroreceptor-mediated activation of the sympathetic system. During the second phase, a vasovagal reaction occurs in all the mammalian species studied, but only when the blood volume is reduced by about 30% [ ]. BP suddenly falls and HR decreases. During severe hemorrhage in cats and rabbits, it has been shown that the decrease in BP is secondary to transient inhibition of the sympathetic system, as evidenced by a dramatic decrease in renal sympathetic nerve activity [ , , , ]. The same response (bradycardia and hypotension) observed during hemorrhage has been reported in an experimental setting during reduction of the venous return by graded occlusion of inferior vena cava in conscious rabbits and rats [ , ]. Even in this situation a biphasic response was observed: first a rise and then a sudden decline in sympathetic nerve activity [ ].
There are similarities between orthostatic VVS in man and vasovagal reflex during severe hemorrhage in animals. In these two situations the trigger appears to be the same, i.e., thoracic hypovolemia, which is responsible for the vasovagal reflex during prolonged standing or diagnostic tilt testing in humans and severe hemorrhage in animals and humans. The efferent pathway also appears to be the same: a transient withdrawal of the sympathetic system, as shown by the sudden decrease in BP and also by micro-neurographic recordings [ , , , ], associated with an increase in vagal activity, as shown by the slowing of HR. In both situations, the transient inhibition of the sympathetic system is preceded by overactivity of the same system. Since the vasovagal reflex during severe hemorrhage has been observed in many mammals as well as in humans with the same physiological mechanism [ , , , , , , , , ], this means that the orthostatic vasovagal reflex is predisposed in primates and other mammals.
These similarities suggest that typical VVS in humans shares the same physiological mechanisms observed in the other vertebrates and this is indicative of a common evolutionary root. Accordingly, typical VVS would not have evolved in the modern human being, as suggested in the human violent conflicts theory [ ], but it should be regarded as an advantageous response which originated in the ancient past within some ancestral groups of vertebrates. If the vasovagal reflex is predisposed in all the vertebrates, from fishes to mammals, it remains to be explained why TLoC is frequent in humans, but extremely rare in animals. van Dijk [ ] offered a possible explanation based on some anatomical or physiological traits evolved in the human lineage: (1) the metabolic demand for the brain is lower in animals than in humans; for example, in humans about 20% of cardiac output is destined for the brain, while in apes (gorilla, chimpanzee) the proportion of cardiac output that needs to be pumped upwards is only 4–7%. As a consequence, a cerebral hypoperfusion severe enough to elicit TLoC occurs rarely in animals; (2) human legs are relatively more robust than hind legs in other primates or other tall or long-necked mammals, and muscle pump appears less active in humans; as a consequence, upon assuming the upright position, gravity causes more venous pooling in the human legs and, consequently, more orthostatic difficulties. In other words, the orthostatic vasovagal reflex appears to be predisposed in primates and other mammals; however, for the aforementioned reasons, and because of the quadruped or recumbent position, this reflex is likely activated less often in animals. When activated, it is unable to induce cerebral hypoperfusion severe enough to elicit TLoC. In humans, who assumed an erect position and developed a large brain, the vasovagal reflex can more easily induce severe cerebral hypoperfusion and, consequently, TLoC.
Vasovagal reflex as a “defense mechanism”
If the vasovagal reflex has persisted for millions of years along the vertebrates’ evolutionary history, we can reasonably assume that it has (or, for some groups, it maybe had in the past) a function and it is not harmful, otherwise it should have been eliminated by natural selection. It could be neutral or beneficial, but some observations suggest that it could be beneficial. Since this phenotype is sporadically displayed, a possible role as a defense mechanism appears likely. The open question is “what is the advantage of the vasovagal reaction?” In other words, which hypothesis best explains its evolution? Did the vasovagal reflex evolve as an advantageous response to inescapable predators or to stressful and possibly dangerous sympathetic overactivity? Under the first hypothesis, emotional VVS might be an evolutionary relict or correlate of a prey-related behavior. Alarm bradycardia is not a constant response during tonic immobility [ , ]; however, when it occurs associated with the reduction of respiratory rate, it may help to better simulate death by lessening the movements and/or sounds that accompany normal or increased heart and breathing rates that a predator can detect [ ]. On the other hand, under the heart defense hypothesis, the transient inhibition of the sympathetic system, together with the activation of the vagal system, appears to be beneficial for the organism, above all for the heart, in situations, such as fear/threat and thoracic hypovolemia, characterized by sympathetic overactivity with increased myocardial oxygen demand and impaired coronary perfusion. The vasovagal reflex may (1) constitute a beneficial break of cardiac pump by reducing myocardial oxygen consumption, (2) permit better diastolic filling and coronary perfusion, and probably (3) ameliorate the pumping efficiency of the heart even if BP decreases. The hypothesis that alarm bradycardia during tonic immobility behavior improves survival is fascinating, but it does not directly explain the vasovagal reflex during orthostatic stress. Therefore, the vasovagal reflex appears to be a defense mechanism against sympathetic overactivity, which is a stressful and possibly dangerous condition, mainly for the heart. Our analysis suggests that TLoC appears to be an acquired disadvantage during the evolutionary process of our species and might be explained as a by-product due to the erect position and the large brain evolved in humans.
Brain self-preservation theory
Very recently, Blanc and Benditt [ ] proposed a new hypothesis to try to explain the origin and evolution of VVS, the “brain self-preservation theory”. According to this theory, VVS is a clinical feature unique to humans, and TLoC by itself appears to be a protective mechanism for the brain. Under certain circumstances, the cerebral blood flow (CBF) can decrease; the faint causes the body to take on a gravitationally neutral position and thereby provides a better chance of restoring brain blood supply and preserving long-term brain function. This theory is based on four observations: (1) human brain is disproportionally large compared to animals, (2) VVS provokes a loss of postural tone and a fall, (3) just before TLoC there is a major paradoxical decrease in BP and HR, (4) lying down as a consequence of the loss of postural tone during clinical VVS or returning the tilt table to the horizontal position permits prompt recovery of BP and HR, and restores normal level of consciousness. According to this theory, VVS appears to be triggered by a reduction in CBF. In this regard, some studies have shown that during tilt testing cerebral hypoperfusion can precede by several seconds or minutes systemic hypotension and VVS [ , , , , ]. Bondar et al. [ ], using a transcranial Doppler technique, analyzed the time-course responses of HR, BP, and middle cerebral artery mean flow velocity during lower body negative pressure in subjects with falling BP during presyncope. These investigators noted that cerebral artery mean flow velocity modification heralds the decrease in mean arterial BP and HR. Dan et al. [ ], using a similar technique, determinated that the CBF/RR interval ratio began to fall about 30 s before mean arterial BP. Szufladowicz et al. [ ], utilizing near-infrared spectroscopy which evaluates cerebral blood oxygenation, investigated 42 subjects with VVS during tilt testing and observed that a reduction in oxyhemoglobin concentration preceded BP and HR drop by 2.2 min and TLoC by 3.3 min. By using the same technique, similar results were reported by Cheng et al. [ ], who observed that the decline in cerebral perfusion preceded the decrease in BP by several seconds. As a whole, the results of the studies mentioned above [ , , , , ], carried out in subjects with presyncope/syncope induced during tilt testing, show that CBF supply decreases before the drop in BP, but not at all, or in a more limited way, in non-syncope individuals. Blanc and Benditt [ ] summarized the brain self-preservation theory as follows: “When the human’s brain senses a decrease in blood supply below a certain limit, it initiates a self-preservation reflex, activating the vagal system and/or inactivating the sympathetic system in order to create bradycardia and vasodilatation. This maneuver in turn decreases blood supply and leads to loss of both consciousness and postural tone; the former inherently reduces energy consumption temporarily in order to better preserve functional integrity, while the latter (i.e., the fall to a gravitationally neutral position) acts to improve blood supply delivery to the brain by diminishing the adverse effect of gravity. In essence, if human VVS is a self-preservation reaction of the brain, the decrease in HR and BP should no longer be considered a paradox; it is, in fact, a logical response to an extreme decrease in cerebral blood supply unmanageable by other means. By this theory, the brain has become so important for humans that it could be speculated that it has been necessary for it to acquire its own self-preservation autonomy and VVS could be considered as its ultimate attempt.” This theory appears fascinating, but, in our opinion, it has some limitations: (1) VVS is not a clinical feature unique to humans. It has been observed during venipuncture in captive chimpanzees [ ]. Recently, Porteiro Vázquez et al. [ ] published electrocardiographic recordings of typical reflex syncope in some dogs which underwent Holter monitoring for syncope of suspected cardiac origin. That means that reflex syncope can also occur in individuals without a large brain, even if infrequently; (2) As mentioned above, it has been shown that a cerebral hypoperfusion can precede the fall in systemic BP during tilt testing; however, large variations in cerebral hemodynamics were observed and reduction in CBF was observed even in subjects not developing presyncope/syncope [ , , , , ]. In this regard, healthy anxious subjects, who often show an impaired autonomic regulation, experienced more pronounced decreases in CBF from the supine to the upright position than non-anxious healthy subjects, as an expression of some insufficiency in maintaining cerebral perfusion with standing; moreover, the CBF curves returned to normal after anxiolytic therapy [ ]. These results suggest that the alterations in cerebral hemodynamics occurring during tilt testing before presyncope/syncope, not well elucidated as other aspects of VVS, are not specific for impending syncope and appear to be an expression of the complex autonomic imbalance characterizing VVS; (3) The brain self-preservation theory does not explain emotional VVS. In this regard, there is no demonstration that CBF decreases during negative emotions, which can trigger typical VVS. By contrast, in some studies [ , , ] CBF increased during these situations. Troisi et al. [ , ], using transcranial Doppler ultrasonography, observed in healthy subjects during negative emotions an increase in mean blood flow velocity in both middle cerebral arteries, more marked in the right than in the left hemisphere. The same results were reported by Lupo et al. [ ] who investigated healthy subjects during negative emotions, using the same technique. Even if transcranial Doppler ultrasonography cannot be used for describing the absolute value of CBF, it is a reliable indicator of rapid flow changes in the areas supplied by the large intracerebral arteries and of modifications in brain perfusion [ , ]. These results do not definitely exclude VVS as an expression of a primary modification of the CBF, but they do not support this hypothesis.
Conclusion
The only unifying theory able to explain the occurrence of the vasovagal reflex and its associated selective advantage, during both orthostatic and emotional stress, appears to be the heart defense hypothesis. Actually, the vasovagal reflex seems to be a protective mechanism against sympathetic overactivity and the heart is the most vulnerable organ during this condition. It should be underlined that during the vasovagal reflex the transient inhibition of the sympathetic system is generally preceded by increase of sympathetic activity; in this regard, pallor is a nearly constant symptom in subjects with typical VVS and is an expression of sympathetic overactivity. The apparent paradox of high adrenaline level followed by transient sympathetic nerve activity inhibition seems to be characteristic of the vasovagal reflex both in humans and animals. That is, the sympathetic system, activated up to a certain level, likely different from individual to individual, inhibits itself. This unique mechanism appears to be highly suggestive of a defense mechanism because high sympathetic activity is a stressful and possibly dangerous condition. Our analysis suggests that typical VVS did not evolve recently in the human lineage and TLoC seems to be an acquired disadvantage in our species. However, it is likely that the development of the large brain in humans has prompted the organism to develop new defense mechanisms for this important organ, which at present are substantially unknown; future research could improve our knowledge on this issue. Even if VVS by itself is a benign condition, TLoC is obviously associated with loss in postural tone resulting in falls which predispose to traumas and/or psychological affections. However, it must be underlined that the links between vasovagal reactions in animals and human VVS are not completely understood; therefore, our conclusions are partly speculative. We do not know whether VVS in its current form can still be considered as beneficial; even if it is based on a beneficial principle its expression suggests a response that has gone out of control [ ]. In this regard the prevalence of typical VVS appears to be rather high [ , , , , , ], but we do not know whether the prevalence of this type of syncope is increased, decreased, or remained unchanged in the last millennia. In both humans and animals, the vasovagal reflex can be associated with asystole [ , , ], which is not beneficial for the heart, the brain, or any tissue. Asystole appears to be an expression of hypersensitivity to the vasovagal reflex in some individuals; in this regard, all the defense mechanisms for the organism can show adverse effects; for instance, the antibodies, which are one of the most important defense mechanisms, can sometimes be a source of very severe negative effects. To date, the genes responsible for alarm bradycardia in animals and for vasovagal reflex in animals and humans have not been discovered; future genetic research could help to better understand the evolution of typical VVS.