Introduction
Patients with ruptured thoracic aneurysms and dissections are often elderly and have preexisting medical comorbidities [ , ]. Despite improved surgical techniques and perioperative medical management, open repair still carries a mortality ranging between 20 and 40% [ , ], with a high incidence of renal, pulmonary and cardiac complications as well as of spinal cord injury [ , ].
Over the last two decades, elective endovascular treatment has practically replaced open repair for various thoracic aortic pathologies. Although initially reserved for patients unfit for open repair, this technique is now increasingly being used in the acute setting [ , , ].
The aim of the study was to retrospectively evaluate the efficacy of emergency endovascular repair in non-traumatic rupture of the descending thoracic aorta.
Materials and Methods
Between January 2011 and August 2017, twenty-two consecutive patients presenting with acute non-traumatic rupture of the descending thoracic aorta were treated primarily with endovascular stent-graft implantation. During this period, no descending thoracic aortic ruptures underwent open surgical repair. The diagnosis of acute rupture was established clinically and confirmed by computed tomography (CT). All patients had contrast-enhanced CT scans of the aorta with slice thickness ranging between 1 and 3 mm; axial as well as multi-planar secondary reconstructions, 3D shaded surface displays and volume rendering technology (VRT) images were also available.
The CT features of rupture included peri-aortic hematoma/fluid with stranding, extra-aortic extravasation of contrast, hemorrhagic pleural or pericardial effusion and hemomediastinum (Fig. 1 ). The decision to intervene was taken after interdisciplinary discussion between the cardiothoracic surgeons, anesthetists and interventional radiologists. The endovascular team proceeded to immediate intervention without prior cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage. This was planned to be performed post-interventionally when clinically indicated. Fig. 1 Axial CT sections showing signs of aortic rupture ( A ) with peri-aortic hematoma (big arrow) and hemomediastinum (small arrow) associated with hemothorax ( A , B ). Note the high attenuation (arrow) caused by blood in the dependant part of the pleural fluid in ( B )
For a retrospective analysis of patients who had undergone emergency life-saving treatment, institutional review board approval was deemed unnecessary. Informed consent was obtained from all patients.
Procedure Details
The procedures were carried out under general anesthesia. All procedures were performed in the angiography suite (Siemens Axiom Artis) of the radiology department, which is a hygiene class II procedure room, but not a hybrid operating room (OR) according to the healthcare hospital hygiene guidelines [ ]. For percutaneous access, the Prostar XL closure device (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was used. A surgical team and a fully equipped OR were on standby for open surgical intervention, in case endograft implantation failed or in case of inadequate proximal or distal sealing on the completion angiogram.
Antibiotic prophylaxis was carried out in all patients. A calibrated diagnostic catheter was introduced from the contralateral femoral access for carrying out control angiograms. After pre-placement of the sutures in percutaneous access or direct surgical exposure of the femoral vessels ipsilaterally, a 10F sheath was introduced, over which a 0.035-inch super-stiff guide wire (Back-up Meier, Boston Scientific Corporation, Marlborough, MA, USA, or Lunderquist, Cook Medical, Bjaeverskov, Denmark) was advanced into the ascending thoracic aorta with the help of a diagnostic catheter. In dissections, pelvic, abdominal and the thoracic angiograms were performed via a pig-tail catheter, while this was advanced into the ascending aorta; the purpose was to confirm the correct position of the catheter in the true lumen. Introduction of the super-stiff guide wire over this catheter ensured correct position of the guide wire in the true lumen.
The stent-graft (Valiant Captivia, Medtronic Vascular Inc., Santa Rosa, CA, USA) was then introduced over the super-stiff guide wire and deployed with or without coverage of the origin of the left subclavian artery, as was necessary to attain adequate proximal sealing (Fig. 2 ). In the acute setting no cerebral angiogram was performed to check the patency of the circle of Willis. The decision regarding multiple grafts was taken on the basis of the control angiograms. In aneurysms, more than one endograft was implanted as and when necessary till adequate proximal and distal sealing was achieved. In dissections, if after sealing the primary entry tear with an endograft, further intimal tears in the descending aorta were seen, then additional distal stent-grafts were implanted. In cases with no further intimal tears of the descending aorta and inadequate widening of the true lumen despite primary entry closure with a stent-graft, bare metal stents (Evita E-XL, Jotec GmbH, Hechingen, Germany) were implanted; the aim was either to improve distal malperfusion or to initiate better apposition of the intimal flap to the adventitia in order to expedite false lumen thrombosis. Fig. 2 Same patient as in Fig. 1 before ( A ) and after ( B ) stent-graft implantation with coverage of origin of left subclavian artery
Thoracic endografts were oversized in relation to the landing zones by about 15% in case of aneurysms and about 5–7% in case of dissections. Ballooning of the stent-graft at the landing zones and in the overlapping zones of multiple stent-grafts was routinely performed in aneurysms but was avoided in dissections.
All patients received a groin compression bandage for 24 h with additional surgical drains in patients with surgical femoral access.
Follow-Up
Postoperatively, the patients were followed up with the assessment of laboratory and clinical parameters as well as an ultrasound examination of the groin. To assess improvement in renal function, the creatinine values before discharge were compared with the pre-procedural values. In the four patients who died, the last creatinine values prior to death were compared with the preoperative values. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to calculate the p value for the null hypothesis (Statistical package for Social Sciences for Windows, SPSS Version 23, Chicago, IL, USA). A p value less than 0.05 denotes statistical significance. Follow-up after discharge consisted of clinical assessment of the patient and CT scans after 6 months and at yearly intervals thereafter. Median follow-up was 29 months (range 6–65 months).
Results
The patient demographics are depicted in Table 1 . The mean age of the group (16 men) was 73.7 years, range 63–92 years. Etiology of rupture was dissection in nine (7 acute type B (within 14 days of onset of symptoms), 2 chronic type B) and atherosclerotic aneurysm in 13 patients. Table 1 Patient variables and their frequency in the patient cohort Patient variable Frequency Percentage Male gender 16 72.7 Hypertension 21 95.4 Diabetes mellitus 3 13.6 Cardiac diseases (valvular heart disease, arrhythmias, coronary artery disease) 13 59.0 Hyperlipidemia 10 45.4 Tobacco use 9 40.9 Anticoagulation/anti-platelet treatment 17 77.2
Hemorrhagic pericardial effusion was observed in 3 patients and hemorrhagic pleural effusion in 12 (Fig. 1 ). In the rest of the patients, local peri-aortic or mediastinal hematoma was observed. One patient presented with severe hemoptysis secondary to aneurysm rupture. The exact point of rupture with clear extravasation and surrounding hematoma could be pinpointed only in 2 patients. In the remaining cases the rupture site was presumed to be where the maximum diameter of aorta and the maximum size of hematoma were observed.
The introducer system size ranged from 22 to 25 F. 72.7% of the patients (16/22) received the stent-graft implantation through the right femoral access. Technical success was 100% with percutaneous access in 19 patients (86.3%) and surgical femoral access in three.
Thirteen patients (59%) received a single endograft, 8 (36%) received 2 endografts, and one patient received 3 endografts. The endograft diameters ranged between 28 and 46 mm, with a median diameter of 34 mm. The median coverage length in the total group was 167 mm (range 150–328 mm). Two patients with dissection received additional distal extension with bare metal true lumen stents (Evita E-XL, Jotec GmbH, Hechingen, Germany) up to a level about 2–3 cm above the origin of the celiac trunk.
No debranching procedures were performed before the endovascular treatment. The origin of the left subclavian artery was partially covered in 2 patients and fully covered in 4 patients (2 each with aneurysms and dissections).
Between 1 and 11 days following endovascular repair, 11 patients (50%) required additional drainage of thoracic hematoma to improve compromised respiratory status. Three of these were drained surgically and the remaining percutaneously. Surgical evacuation was resorted to only if percutaneous drainage failed to produce adequate clinical improvement.
Hemorrhagic pericardial effusion was managed conservatively in all the 3 patients as it was not large enough to cause pericardial tamponade.
One patient, who presented with hemoptysis secondary to aorto-bronchial fistula and aneurysm rupture, received prolonged antibiotic coverage with initial Cefazolin for 5 days followed by Cefuroxim for 6 weeks after the stent-graft implantation.
No type I or type III endoleaks were observed during the hospital stay. One patient exhibited a type II endoleak from an intercostal artery, which had thrombosed on the CT scan before discharge.
Three primary percutaneous sites (15.7%) required surgical repair of access site pseudoaneurysms in the late peri-procedural period.
No spinal CSF drains were inserted pre- or peri-procedurally. No spinal cord ischemic complications were noted. Stroke was observed in 2 patients (9%), both with coverage of the origin of the left subclavian artery. One patient had mild infarction of the left occipital and left cerebellar cortex. The other patient suffered extensive multiple infarcts of both cerebral hemispheres and basal ganglia.
The intensive care unit stay in the patient cohort ranged from 1 to 27 days, with a median of 5 days. Four patients required tracheostomy for prolonged respiratory support.
No renal complications were observed. The mean serum creatinine values on admission (1.05 ± 0.23 mg/dl) fell significantly at discharge/death (0.9 ± 0.28 mg/dl) ( p = 0.026). One dissection patient with distal malperfusion experienced a short period of anuria during the intensive care unit stay. This resolved during the course of the hospital stay and raised creatinine values of 3.9 mg/dl normalized on further follow-up.
The 30-day and all in-hospital mortality was 18.1% (4/22). Of these 4 patients, 3 patients had ruptured aneurysms and 1 had a complicated type B dissection with malperfusion of the visceral arteries as well as false lumen rupture of the descending thoracic aorta. This patient received 3 endografts for adequate coverage of the ruptured segment and improvement of the blood flow in the true lumen. Immediately after implanting the third stent-graft, severe hemodynamic instability occurred followed by circulatory collapse and death.
The second patient died as a complication of central venous line insertion leading to hemothorax and respiratory insufficiency.
The third and fourth patients died secondary to ongoing hemodynamic instability due to the rupture.
The median hospital stay was 16.5 days (range 7–68 days). All surviving patients were hemodynamically stable at discharge. One patient received a cardiac defibrillator and pacing before discharge. No other cardiac/coronary complications were observed. The median hemoglobin value of the patients on discharge was 10 g/dl (range 8.7–12.3 g/dl).
Of the 18 patients who were discharged, seven patients died at further follow-up. One of them died of hemodynamic shock secondary to surgical intervention for esophageal perforation 3 months following stent-graft implantation. Two patients with prolonged peri-interventional respiratory support died 2 and 2.5 months after intervention due to pulmonary infection and respiratory insufficiency. The other 4 patients died at home of unknown causes.
Of the surviving 11 patients, one showed an increase in aneurysm size of 2 mm without evidence of visible endoleak at 6-month follow-up; she is presently awaiting the 1-year follow-up. The remaining 10 patients showed a stable aorta on the follow-up CT examinations. No further aorta-related events were noted in these 11 patients. Thus, the overall survival rate at a median follow-up of 29 months was 50%.
Discussion
As opposed to open surgical repair, the endovascular approach helps circumvent thoracotomy, circulatory arrest and aortic cross-clamping. Given the high mortality and high rates of renal, pulmonary and cardiac complications associated with open repair, a comparison of these outcomes with those of endoluminal repair could be interesting.
The 30-day and in-hospital mortality of 18.1% in our cohort compares well with similar rates reported in the literature for stent-graft implantation [ , , , ] and is lower than the rates reported with open repair, which may be as high as 40% [ , ].
In patients treated with open surgery, pulmonary and renal complication rates of 31.9 and 24.6%, respectively, have been reported in the recent literature [ ]. The rate of similar complications in our cohort is lower with pulmonary complications occurring in 18% of patients and renal complications in none.
The incidence of paraplegia reported with surgical repair of the thoracic aorta is between 14.5 and 21% [ , ]. As opposed to this, none of our patients experienced this complication. In the literature, the incidence of spinal cord ischemia following endovascular repair is reported to be between 1 and 5% [ ].
In 19 of 22 patients, endovascular repair could be carried out percutaneously. In the future, with the interventionist becoming increasingly familiar with percutaneous closure devices, the procedure could be performed under local anesthesia or analgo-sedation, thus circumventing further hemodynamic instability that may be associated with general anesthesia and muscle relaxation in an already unstable patient [ ].
In recent years, endoluminal treatment of ruptured thoracic aorta under local anesthesia and permissive hypotension during stent-graft deployment and relative hypertension after deployment has been reported. Fluid restriction and accepting lower systolic pressures to maintain adequate cerebral, coronary and visceral circulation constitute controlled or permissive hypotension. It is postulated to reduce the risk of further hemorrhage in an already unstable patient [ ]. Such adjuncts, not used in our cohort, could possibly further reduce the 30-day mortality.
Endovascular repair may, however, not be a definitive treatment for aortic rupture. Late re-ruptures following successful primary endovascular repair have been reported in patients with ruptured type B dissections. Re-rupture may possibly also have been the cause of death in one or more of the four patients in our cohort who died of unknown causes at follow-up. Consequently, Trimarchi and colleagues consider thoracic endovascular aortic repair in ruptured cases (rTEVAR) to be merely a suitable bridging procedure to elective open repair at a later stage [ ]. We too, in part, share this viewpoint and would advocate a close follow-up of these patients in order to detect further impending rupture in time.
There are several limitations of our study. This is a single-center retrospective study with a heterogeneous cohort population comprising of ruptured dissections and atherosclerotic aneurysms. The follow-up period is limited, and the patient number is small. Furthermore, timely secondary interventions may have been underused. These limitations must be taken into consideration when analyzing the results in their correct perspective.
Conclusion
Acute rupture of the descending thoracic aorta secondary to atherosclerotic aneurysm or type B dissection can be effectively treated endovascularly. The procedures can be performed percutaneously. The outcomes in the acute phase are superior to those of open surgery. The incidence of renal and pulmonary complications as well as that of spinal cord injury is lower than that reported with open surgical repair. This would suggest giving the endovascular approach preference over open repair.