Introduction
Familial dysautonomia (FD; OMIM 223900; also called Riley-Day syndrome) is classified as one of the hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies (HSAN type III) and afflicts Jews of eastern European, Ashkenazi descent; 1:18–1:32 Ashkenazi Jews are carriers of the mutant haplotype [ , ]. Its hallmark features result from a depletion of sensory and autonomic neurons, which manifests as reduced pain and temperature sensation, cardiovascular instability, gastrointestinal incoordination, respiratory dysfunction, and frequent autonomic “crises” marked by vomiting, nausea, hypertension, tachycardia, and blotching—the consequences of unrestrained release of catecholamines in plasma [ , , ]. With close supervision, now more than 50% of patients can reach age 30 [ ], with the most common cause of death being sudden death during sleep. FD is both a developmental and a progressive neurodegenerative disease, and although considered an HSAN, its pathology is not restricted to the peripheral nervous system (PNS). In fact, one of the most debilitating hallmarks of the disease as patients age is blindness, as a consequence of progressive death of retinal ganglion cells [ , , ]. In addition, the vast majority of patients develop scoliosis (in particular, kyphoscoliosis) and tend to have difficulty gaining and maintaining weight [ ].
FD results from a point mutation in the IKBKAP/ELP1 gene with over 99% of cases due to the same 6T > C substitution in the donor splice site in intron 20 [ , ]. Exon 20 is variably deleted from the FD IKBKAP mRNA, according to tissue type, and is ultimately degraded by nonsense-mediated decay [ , , ]. Although IKBKAP/ELP1 is widely expressed throughout the body, the nervous system is least capable of correctly splicing the mutant pre-mRNA and hence is the most impaired system in FD [ ].
IKBKAP/ELP1 encodes the protein IKAP, which is homologous to the protein that is encoded by the yeast Elp1 gene. IKAP is the scaffolding subunit of the six-subunit Elongator complex, which is required for chemical modification of tRNAs [ , ]; its absence abrogates translation, which induces ribosome pausing [ ], protein aggregation, and misfolding [ ]. This essential function of the Elongator complex in the addition of 5-methoxycarbonylmethyl (mcm 5 ) and 5-carbamoylmethyl (ncm 5 ) moieties to wobble uridines within the tRNA anti-codon loop has been corroborated in mouse cells and, importantly, has been shown to be deficient in human FD cells [ , , ]. The Elongator complex has also been shown to be required in the nucleus for normal transcript elongation [ , ] and to negatively regulate exocytosis in yeast and in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans ( C. elegans ), and it is required for vesicle trafficking, cytoskeleton stability and dynamics [ , , , , , , ], and neuronal survival [ , , ]. Interestingly, IKAP is just one of six subunits of the Elongator complex, and recently it has become clear that several of the other Elongator genes are also associated with neurological disorders: ELP3 with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, ELP2 and ELP4 with intellectual disability and ELP4 with Rolandic epilepsy [ , , , , , , ].
How one complex can exert such profound effects on multiple functions in various cell types has recently stimulated an exciting series of studies, which have contributed significantly to our understanding of the molecular, cellular, and physiological mechanisms that underlie FD and to identifying the critical role of the Elongator complex in the nervous system. IKAP/ELP1 has been investigated in numerous animal and cellular models. In light of the several excellent comprehensive review articles that have been published recently on FD, IKBKAP , and the Elongator complex [ , , ], the goal of this review is to summarize what the past 15 years of animal and cellular model studies of FD have taught us about the normal function of IKAP and how its reduction in FD disrupts cellular function to ultimately manifest in the clinical symptomatology of FD.
Non-mammalian models of familial dysautonomia
Loss of function studies on Ikbkap have been conducted in several species including yeast, C. elegans , chick, zebrafish, Xenopus , Drosophila , and mice, and they complement and build on each other’s findings. Studies in C. elegans , zebrafish, chick, and Drosophila all show a requirement for IKAP and/or the Elongator complex in normal axonal morphology, with reductions in Ikbkap/Elp1 causing abnormal branching [ , , ], reduced vesicle movement along microtubules, disrupted target innervation [ , ], and compromised c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and nerve growth factor (NGF) signaling [ ]. In addition, mutants lacking Ikbkap/Elp1 and/or the Elongator complex had abnormal synaptic function [ ], larval development [ , , ], and learning impairment [ ]. Gastrointestinal (GI) problems plague the majority of FD patients, and the investigation of GI function in the absence of Ikbkap has been done solely in zebrafish. Antisense RNA reduction of Ikbkap/Elp1 in zebrafish embryos led to a significant decrease in enteric neurons including complete agangliogenesis of the distal intestine [ ]. These findings are analogous to the human FD gastroenteropathy, which most likely results from reduced numbers of enteric neurons [ ]. While trunk neural crest migration in chick and mouse does not require Ikbkap [ , , ], reduction of Elp3 in Xenopus impairs neural crest migration [ ]. Whether IKAP has functions independent from its fellow Elongator complex subunits remains an important question.
Mouse models of familial dysautonomia
Several attempts have been made to generate a useful mouse model for FD (Table 1 ). Hims et al. first generated a humanized FD mouse using a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) to deliver the full human IKBKAP gene containing the human exon 20 splice site mutation (IVS20 + T →C) into the mouse genome [ ]. They demonstrated that the human FD IKBKAP gene is incorrectly spliced in the mouse in a tissue-specific manner that mirrors the splicing pattern observed in human FD patients, with neurons being the least capable of overcoming the splicing defect. This humanized FD mouse model did not manifest any FD symptoms and is phenotypically normal because it expresses normal levels of endogenous mouse IKAP. A similar approach was taken by Bochner et al. [ ] in which they generated a knock-in homozygous humanized mouse line by swapping the human exon 20 and its two flanking introns with the 3′ intron having the same mutation that occurs in the FD IKBKAP gene, for the endogenous mouse exon 20 and flanking intron sequences. Although this mouse exhibited some degree of tissue-specific skipping of the mutant human exon 20, this occurred primarily in the liver rather than in the nervous system; consequently, this line did not express any FD phenotype. However, both of these models provide powerful systems for testing therapeutics that can modify splicing of the human IKBKAP gene (Table 1 ). Table 1 Mouse models of familial dysautonomia Ikbkap status Phenotype References Human FD- IKBKAP via BAC No FD symptoms; tissue-specific splicing defect mirrors human FD Hims et al. [ ] Complete KO mouse Embryonic lethality Chen et al. [ ] Δ20 Ikbkap allele Embryonic lethality Dietrich et al. [ ] Floxed Ikbkap 90% reduction in IKAP protein; small stature, ataxic gait, kyphoscoliosis, reduced pain and temperature sensation, loss of fungiform papillae, progressive eye and bladder problems Dietrich et al. [ ] Floxed/Δ20 Ikbkap compound heterozygote 95% reduction in IKAP protein; small stature, ataxic gait, kyphoscoliosis, reduced pain and temperature sensation, loss of fungiform papillae, progressive eye and bladder problems; loss of DRG neurons Dietrich et al. [ ] Wnt1 - Cre;Ikbkap LoxP/LoxP PNS-specific ablation Decreased number of 2nd wave neuronal progenitors and post-mitotic neurons during development; pups die within 24 h of birth George et al. [ ] TgFD9; Ikbkap ∆20/flox low levels of WT Ikbkap , tissue specific expression of correctly spliced human WT IKBKAP Reduced growth rate, reduced number of fungiform papillae, spinal abnormalities, sensory and sympathetic impairments, and recreates the same tissue-specific mis-splicing defect seen in FD patients Morini et al. [ ] Wnt1 - Cre;Ikbkap LoxP/LoxP PNS-specific ablation Innervation abnormalities; pups die shortly after birth Jackson et al. [ ] DβH - iCre; Ikbkap LoxP/LoxP Selective ablation in lineage-specified sympathetic neuroblasts Innervation abnormalities Jackson et al. [ ] Humanized IKBKAP CKO Tryp2 DRG-specific ablation beginning at E12.5 Irregular neurite outgrowth and branching, impaired NGF transport, decreased acetylated alpha-tubulin Naftelberg et al. [ ] Tuba1a - Cre; Ikbkap LoxP/LoxP Pan-neuronal deletion of Ikbkap in both CNS and PNS beginning at E12.5 Abnormal neuromuscular junction innervation, cortical and motor neuron number, and number and organization of primary cilia; progressive neurodegenerative condition that includes kyphoscoliosis, and impairments in behavior including learning and memory; progressive retinal degeneration Chaverra et al. [ ] and Ueki et al. [ ]
Chen et al. subsequently utilized a knock-out (KO) approach to create a mouse model with FD characteristics [ ]. Unfortunately, complete deletion of the mouse Ikbkap gene results in early embryonic lethality. Analysis of Ikbkap null embryos revealed abnormal vasculature development, arrested embryonic development at the mid-gastrulation stage, and death between E10.5 and E12.5. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays of KO embryos found that the loss of IKAP protein expression resulted in a loss of histone acetylation and transcriptional elongation. In an effort to rescue the embryonic lethality, the human IKBKAP gene was introduced into the mouse Ikbkap KO background; the resulting pups were viable and appeared to be phenotypically normal. However, introducing the FD version of human IKBKAP failed to rescue the embryonic lethality seen in the KO mouse. The authors speculate that there is a tissue-specific threshold of IKAP protein expression required for survival, and it is not surprising that a full KO produces a non-viable mouse.
Since the major haplotype FD mutation results in the aberrant exclusion of exon 20 from the IKBKAP mRNA, Dietrich et al. created two lines of mice—one resulting in loss of Ikbkap expression and one resulting in expression of Ikbkap mRNA that lacked exon 20 (Δ20 mice) [ ]. In both cases, however, embryonic development is delayed and ultimately fails, including in the heart and the brain, leading to the conclusion that the embryos are likely dying from heart failure. In the brain, development of the diencephalon, midbrain, and hindbrain are grossly normal, suggesting that IKAP expression is not required for neural tube closure and formation of the neuroepithelium. However, development of the cerebral cortex was impaired, demonstrating a role for IKAP in forebrain development. Genetic analysis of the Ikbkap Δ20 mice revealed a downregulation of genes in the Nkx2 - 5 homeobox transcription factor network and a reduction in transforming growth factor (TGF)β signaling components. Although the Ikbkap Δ20 mice are not a useful model given the early embryonic lethality, this model did demonstrate that an Ikbkap mRNA lacking exon 20 retains no significant biological activity.
Dietrich et al. then generated mice harboring a loxP-flanked Ikbkap gene locus ( Ikbkap flox/flox ) that results in a 90% reduction in IKAP protein expression as well as a compound heterozygote mouse that combines the floxed and Δ20 Ikbkap alleles ( Ikbkap Δ20/flox ) [ ]. The compound heterozygote model has a 95% reduction in IKAP protein levels. However, in contrast to previous attempts, both the Ikbkap flox/flox and Ikbkap Δ20/flox were viable, albeit they required special care in order to survive. Both lines of mice recapitulate a number of key features of FD, including small stature, ataxic gait, loss of fungiform papillae, loss of pain and temperature sensation, kyphosis or kyphoscoliosis, progressive eye and bladder pathology, and reduced lifespan. Furthermore, Ikbkap Δ20/flox embryos have smaller dorsal root ganglia (DRG), while Ikbkap flox/flox embryos have normal-sized DRG. This finding suggests that a small increase in IKAP protein expression—from 5% in Ikbkap Δ20/flox to 10% in Ikbkap flox/flox —is sufficient to rescue the embryonic development of DRG neurons. In sympathetic ganglia, neurons are morphologically normal, but overall ganglia size and neuron number are reduced and are lost progressively as animals age. These data indicate that IKAP not only has a role in embryonic development, but is also needed for maintaining neurons throughout life. This demonstrates that postnatal reintroduction of IKBKAP expression may have clinical value for mitigating progressive FD symptoms.
In FD patients, inclusion of exon 20 varies with tissue type, with neurons least capable of generating normal transcripts. Consequently, IKAP levels are most compromised in the nervous system. The possibility that a small shift in the balance of splicing could raise neuronal IKAP levels above a threshold level where therapeutic benefit would be achieved prompted generation of the TgFD9; Ikbkap ∆20/flox mouse [ ]. In this FD model, the complete human IKBKAP transgene with the major FD splice mutation ( TgFD9 ) was introduced into the Ikbkap ∆20/flox mouse. This combination transgenic mouse produces mouse Ikbkap mRNA lacking exon 20 from the ∆20 allele, extremely low levels of mouse wild-type (WT) Ikbkap mRNA from the flox allele, human IKBKAP mRNA lacking exon 20 from the FD9 transgene, and tissue-specific expression of correctly spliced human WT IKBKAP mRNA also from the FD9 transgene, with brain and DRG expressing only minimal levels of the functional human transcript. As such, the TgFD9; Ikbkap ∆20/flox mouse most closely models the tissue-specific mis-splicing defect seen in FD patients; it also recapitulates many phenotypic features of the human disease and provides a useful model for testing compounds that could restore normal splicing.
An alternative approach for generating mouse models of FD are conditional knock-out (CKO) mice, in which the Ikbkap gene is selectively deleted from specific cell types at specific time points using Cre - lox -mediated recombination. These models differ from FD in that (1) complete ablation of gene expression can be achieved in the target tissue, while in the human disease, cells express reduced levels of IKAP protein; (2) given the selective, cell type-specific deletion of Ikbkap , the in vivo FD physiological environment is not replicated. However, generating CKO mouse models for major neurological diseases has proven extremely powerful for identifying the molecular, cellular, and pathophysiological mechanisms that mediate those disorders, and they provide spatial and temporal control of gene deletion [ ]. Furthermore, these models have successfully recapitulated key hallmarks of human FD including the selective death of pain and temperature afferent DRG neurons, sympathetic neurons, and retinal ganglion cells; as such, they provide well-defined systems for deducing the function of IKAP and for testing therapeutics that can mitigate the loss of specific cell populations.
Since the PNS is the system most severely impacted in FD, and as the PNS derives from the trunk region of the neural crest, it was speculated that FD results from faulty neural crest migration [ , ]. To test this hypothesis, two groups selectively deleted Ikbkap from the neural crest by constructing Wnt1 - Cre, Ikbkap LoxP/LoxP CKOs with LoxP sites flanking either exon 4 [ ] or exon 20 [ ]. In both systems, Ikbkap expression was specifically ablated in neural crest derivatives of the PNS, and CKO mice were born alive but died within 24 h of birth. George et al. showed that IKAP is expressed throughout neurogenesis in both progenitor cells and neurons and that IKAP-deficient trunk neural crest cells migrate and colonize their derivatives normally. This study also showed that a p53-mediated, activated caspase-3 loss of neuronal progenitors and post-mitotic neurons results in significantly depleted numbers of tropomyosin-related kinase A (TrkA+) DRG neurons by E12.5. Interestingly, this work demonstrated that the first wave of neurogenesis in the DRG that generates the large-diameter TrkC+ proprioceptive neurons is not dependent on Ikbkap , while the second wave, in which the small-diameter TrkA+ pain and temperature sensory neurons are born, does require Ikbkap . In contrast, Jackson et al. saw normal numbers of neurons, proliferating cells, and apoptotic cells in the DRG at E12.5 and instead found diminished numbers of TrkA+ and TrkB+ neurons in newborn mice. They attributed this loss to impairment of target tissue innervation. This same study also examined DβH - iCre; Ikbkap LoxP/LoxP mice, in which Ikbkap expression is selectively ablated in lineage-specified sympathetic neuroblasts, and again found diminished target tissue innervation.
Naftelberg et al. [ ] used a Tyrp2 - Cre driver to remove exon 20 from a humanized IKBKAP knock-in mouse. In IKBKAP CKO Tryp2 offspring, Cre-mediated recombination becomes active at E12.5 in select tissues including the DRG. DRG cultures from these mice showed irregular neurite outgrowth and branching and impaired nerve growth factor (NGF) retrograde transport compared to DRG cultures from control littermates. This reduction may have been due to decreased acetylated alpha-tubulin levels, which they attribute to increased levels of the histone deacetylase HDAC6. Addition of phosphatidylserine to cultured CKO Tryp2 DRG explants improved neurite outgrowth and enhanced NGF transport in neurons that were capable of generating full-length IKAP. Reduction in retrograde transport of NGF was also reported in Ikbkap CKO sympathetic neurons [ ]. IKAP has been reported to be expressed in a vesicular pattern in axons [ , ] and to co-localize with proteins that mediate retrograde transport including tubulin, dynein, and Rab7. Thus, given that both thermoreceptive and nociceptive sensory neurons and sympathetic neurons, three of the most severely affected cell types in FD, are heavily dependent on the retrograde transport of NGF for their survival during development, these intriguing findings warrant further study.
Using a pan-neuronal Cre to delete Ikbkap , Chaverra et al. [ ] generated a Tuba1a - Cre; Ikbkap LoxP/LoxP CKO mouse in which Ikbkap is deleted in both the central nervous system (CNS) and PNS beginning in early development (approximately E12.5). Since CNS pathology has been documented in FD [ , ] and because mutations in other Elongator subunits ( ELP2 - 4 ) are associated with CNS disorders, the goal of this study was to investigate a potential CNS requirement for Ikbkap . Using an Ikbkap reporter, the authors showed that Ikbkap is expressed throughout the CNS both during development and in the adult. During embryogenesis, robust Ikbkap expression was detected in the ventricular zone of the spinal cord and in spinal motor neurons, as well as in the mitotic and post-mitotic zones of the developing cortex and in the choroid plexus. In the adult, Ikbkap was expressed throughout the brain, including the medulla, cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, and hypothalamus. Using the Tuba1a - Cre CKO mouse, the authors show that deletion of Ikbkap in the CNS perturbs both the development and survival of cortical and spinal motor neurons. In addition, they show that Ikbkap is required for the maintenance of innervation of the neuromuscular junction and for normal number and organization of primary cilia in embryonic cortical apical progenitors and motile cilia in adult ependymal cells. Loss of IKAP in the CNS ultimately manifests in a progressive neurodegenerative condition that includes kyphoscoliosis, an FD hallmark, as well as significant impairments of behavior including learning and memory. The former observation suggests that the deletion of Ikbkap solely in neurons is sufficient to trigger the pathophysiological processes underlying the kyphoscoliosis, most likely because of the progressive denervation of paraspinal muscles.
A major disability that marks older FD patients is a progressive loss of vision that ultimately culminates in blindness. Since Ikbkap is deleted from the majority of CNS neurons in Tuba1a - Cre; Ikbkap LoxP/LoxP mice, Ueki et al. [ ] investigated the development and survival of neurons in the retina in this strain. They demonstrated that while Ikbkap is not required for normal development of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), its loss causes a slow, progressive RGC degeneration that is most severe in the temporal retina, recapitulating the human cell type and pattern of retina degeneration [ ]. Further evidence for the validity of this model system includes the finding that the melanopsin RGCs were resistant to death, as has also been found in FD patients [ ]. The RGC degeneration was later followed by indirect photoreceptor loss and complete retinal disorganization. However, in this model, Ikbkap was deleted from the majority of CNS and some PNS neurons; consequently, whether all or some of these retinal phenotypes are directly due to the retinal loss of IKAP is not clear. Work on a retina-specific Ikbkap CKO is in progress to investigate the retinal cell types that autonomously depend on Ikbkap .
Importantly, retinal ganglion cell degeneration was more pronounced in the more metabolically taxed temporal retina than in the less metabolically active nasal retina in both FD patients and the mouse model described above. This pattern of degeneration is a classic hallmark of the major optic neuropathies, Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy and dominant optic atrophy, which are both caused by mutations in mitochondrial genes [ ]. FD patients also suffer frequently from rhabdomyolysis, which can result from mitochondrial-induced myopathy [ ]. These findings provoked a detailed investigation of mitochondrial function in DRG neurons from Wnt1 - cre; Ikbkap LoxP/LoxP mice [ ], which revealed that mitochondria in Ikbkap -depleted DRG neurons were depolarized, fragmented, and released elevated levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) compared to their control littermate DRG neurons. Furthermore, this study also showed that the small hydroxylamine BGP-15, which has been shown in numerous studies to be cytoprotective by exerting antioxidative damage effects, could not only significantly improve mitochondrial function in the CKO neurons, but could also prevent their death both in vitro and in vivo [ ]. These findings and those from several other of the studies described here demonstrate not only the power of mouse models to provide the necessary cell types for elucidation of the pathophysiological mechanisms that cause the FD phenotype, but also their effectiveness as a readily accessible and defined system for testing potential therapeutics.
In summary, the diverse strategies for generating mouse models of FD have contributed significantly to our understanding of the spatial and temporal requirements for IKAP both during development and in the adult. From these and other studies, we have learned that in the absence of IKAP, both CNS and PNS progenitors behave abnormally, that neurons undergo apoptosis in both the developing and adult PNS and CNS and suffer from intracellular stress, that targets are poorly innervated, and that this impaired innervation may be caused and/or exacerbated by diminished retrograde transport of key survival factors such as NGF. These developmental abnormalities could underlie the dysfunctional regulation of the adult sensory, autonomic, central, and enteric nervous systems. These models may even provide an explanation for the FD kyphoscoliosis since it can be recapitulated with a neuronal-specific deletion of Ikbkap in the nervous system, identifying a potential target tissue for therapeutics. Finally, these systems provide heuristic models for generating and multiplexing large data sets from “omic” studies that can form the basis for therapeutic screens. In fact, several of these model systems are already proving invaluable for testing potential therapeutics both in vitro and in vivo, which can mitigate the progressive visual impairment and hopefully rescue additional neuronal cell populations.
Stem cell models of familial dysautonomia
An alternative approach to genetically modified mice for investigating FD is to generate stem cell models. Due to their pluripotent nature, stem cells can be differentiated into neuronal cells, thereby providing a powerful system for modeling human diseases in vitro. FD human embryonic stem cell (hESC) or induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived peripheral nervous system progenitor cells (neural crest) and neurons have been generated and can serve as a potential tool to investigate the molecular mechanisms mediating the demise of neurons in FD [ , , , , ]. In addition, the feasibility of large-scale small-molecule screening using FD-iPSCs [ ] has facilitated the discovery of potential therapeutic compounds that can increase splicing of the mutated IKBKAP mRNA in FD-patient iPSC-derived neural crest cells and increase expression of genes that regulate the differentiation of sympathetic neurons such as ASCL1 and SCG10 .
A major unresolved clinical conundrum in FD is the variation in the disease phenotypic severity among patients even though they share the identical genetic point mutation. Given that patient cells are mosaic in their ability to successfully splice the mutant IKBKAP transcript, it has been postulated that disease severity might be the consequence of, and correlate with, varying levels of IKAP protein production. As described above, one mouse model study did find that slight increases in IKAP protein expression could ameliorate the disease phenotype [ ]. In fact, a recent study reported that patient iPSC-derived neurons may provide a powerful model system for investigating the mechanisms mediating variation in disease severity [ ]. This study showed that neural crest precursor cells and peripheral sensory neurons derived from iPSCs from more severely affected FD patients compared to more mildly affected FD patients did not differ significantly in their ratio of mutant IKBKAP mRNA to wild-type IKBKAP mRNA; however, they did differ in their level of IKAP protein, with severely affected FD patient-derived neural crest precursor cells expressing lower IKAP levels than those of mildly affected patients. In addition, differentiation into sensory and sympathetic neurons was reduced in the severely affected patient iPSCs compared to the mildly affected patient iPSCs, as was neuronal survival. Whole-exome sequencing of three severe vs. three mildly affected patient cell lines revealed secondary mutations in the severely affected patient cell lines not present in the mildly affected lines, suggesting the presence of genetic modifiers that regulate the severity of a patient’s FD phenotype.
Other types of stem cells such as human olfactory ecto-mesenchymal stem cells (hOR-MSCs) from FD patients have also been used to generate a useful FD model. hOR-MSCs can be obtained through patient biopsy, are pluripotent, and express stem cell, neuronal, and glial markers [ ]. Genome-wide analysis (both mRNA and microRNA screening) using FD hOR-MSCs was performed to investigate dysregulated genes in FD and to test potential therapeutics [ , , ]. Recent work with these FD and control hOR-MSCs indicated over-activity of the 26S proteasome in patient cells compared to controls, which lowered the level of IKAP protein, and that this reduction could be reversed by proteasome inhibitors [ ]. Since some proteasome inhibitors have been clinically approved for cancer treatment, this study warrants further investigation. Finally, a method to directly convert fibroblasts into neurons has been developed [ ], providing another mechanism for induction of neuronal (iN) cells that can model neurologic diseases. Using defined transcription factors, Wainger et al. [ ] reprogrammed FD patient fibroblasts into functional nociceptor neurons with native subtype diversity. This direct conversion method could be useful for analyzing the consequences of the IKBKAP mutation in a specific neuronal type in vitro. Obvious challenges of stem cell models include modeling complicated in vivo cellular networks, which is necessary to assess the safety and dose of a potential therapeutic compound as well as to determine their ability to cross the blood-brain barrier. Nonetheless, stem cell models of FD provide an unlimited number of FD patient-derived neurons, which are necessary for high-throughput studies.
Conclusion
While all of these models provide a framework and a tool kit for determining the function and requirement for IKBKAP in the developing and adult nervous system, the pathophysiologic mechanisms that ultimately cause some of the major debilitating clinical autonomic symptoms of FD have not yet been investigated in animal models. Slice preparations from various levels of the neuraxis can be generated and recorded electrophysiologically to investigate the integrity of key neural circuits that mediate the clinical sensory and autonomic hallmarks of FD. One outstanding question is the physiologic mechanisms mediating the erratic, elevated levels of dopamine in FD patient plasma that trigger the vomiting crises during “autonomic storms” [ ]. Studies in yeast have shown that IKAP negatively regulates exocytosis [ ], and evidence has been provided for IKAP localization to synaptic vesicles [ ], raising the testable question of whether aberrant regulation of synaptic transmission may explain some of the autonomic dysfunction in FD. Another question that can be addressed with these animal and cellular models is the underlying metabolic problems experienced by FD patients and recapitulated in mice: patients have a significantly decreased body mass index (BMI), and multiple studies on FD mouse models report weight reductions of 60–70% in mutant mice with an absence of white adipose tissue. Is this due to impaired mitochondrial function and/or dysfunctions in the GI tract and associated gut dysbiosis and/or hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis? These questions call for physiological investigations of the functionality of the autonomic nervous system in mouse models to identify key steps for potential therapeutic intervention. Outside of the autonomic nervous system, the sensory nervous system needs to be more thoroughly investigated. For example, FD patients suffer a progressive degenerative gait ataxia most likely due to the absence of functional muscle spindles [ , ]. Histologic analysis of muscle spindles in one of the mouse FD models [ ] showed that they were present in adult gastrocnemius muscle. However, to what extent they were normally innervated by proprioceptive afferents has not yet been determined. Interestingly, two mouse studies reported that in contrast to the pain and temperature sensory afferents, proprioceptors develop and survive normally in the absence of IKAP, but it has not yet been determined whether they degenerate in adulthood. Since α-motor neurons innervating the neuromuscular junction degenerate in an FD mouse model [ ], it is possible that γ-motor neurons might also degenerate and thereby indirectly affect the integrity of proprioceptors and muscle spindle function.
Generation of these powerful animal and cellular systems can be used to solve several outstanding genetic, molecular, and cellular questions regarding FD. For example, what precipitates the cell type-specific splicing patterns: lymphoblasts and multiple non-neuronal cells can very effectively splice the mutant FD pre-mRNA, conferring protection on those cells, while most neurons are much less capable of accommodating the splice site mutation and consequently suffer from reduced levels of IKAP protein. Investigation of neuron-specific splicing factors could clarify this question [ ]. Another important problem that can be pursued with the existing model systems is a search for genetic modifiers that may mediate the variation in FD phenotype severity. In addition, fundamental questions remain concerning the cellular function(s) of IKAP/ELP1 and to what extent the cellular pathology of FD is a direct and/or indirect consequence of loss of Elongator complex-mediated modification of tRNAs required for translation. Is the mitochondrial impairment the direct and/or indirect upstream trigger for the P53, caspase-3-mediated neuronal apoptosis in FD or are other intracellular stress pathways activated by translation impairment that lead to elevated P53 and neuronal death? Finally, since the discovery that IKAP is a key subunit of the Elongator complex, important work remains to elucidate why mutations in the other Elongator subunits ( ELP2 , ELP3 , and ELP4 ) all cause neurologic disorders, but in distinct cell types and circuits. In summary, from the model systems described here, four exciting and promising therapeutic avenues have emerged for mitigating neuronal death in FD: increasing inclusion of exon 20 in mutant IKBKAP pre-mRNA to ultimately increase IKAP cellular levels, blocking IKAP degradation, preventing the apoptotic death of neurons by reducing intracellular stress, and reintroducing IKBKAP by gene therapy. Although the past 15 years have transformed our genetic, molecular, cellular, and neurobiologic understanding of FD, if the past is prologue, then the next 15 years should be even more illuminating.