Background
Hypertension and dyslipidemias are major risk factors for cardiovascular disease (CVD). According to recent statistics [ ], 270 million Chinese adults in 2012 suffered from hypertension (prevalence 25.2%), overall prevalence of 40.4% from dyslipidemias, and the numbers continue to rise at an increasing rate.
The majority of these patients rely on statins for prevention of CVD. Statins are competitive inhibitors of β -hydroxy- β -methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase, the hepatic cholesterol biosynthesis rate-limiting enzyme, and reduce risk for CVD via lowering low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (non-HDL-C) levels [ , , , ]. Studies have suggested that statins also provide benefits beyond their lipid-lowering effects. For example, higher dose lipophilic statins lowered blood pressure (BP) and reduced salt sensitivity in patients with hypertension and diabetes [ ], and pitavastatin improved left ventricular diastolic function, left atrial structure and function, was associated with lower risk for incident atrial fibrillation in elderly patients with hypertension [ ], and might have anti-inflammatory properties [ ]. Because of these, statins are often preferred, due to consistent reduction in atherosclerotic cardiovascular events and improvement in survival, over other lipid-lowering agents and increasingly used in a broad variety of populations.
Nonetheless, statins are not without adverse effects. It has been suggested that statins were associated with risks for disorders of glucose metabolism and incident diabetes. For example, in 2008, the JUPITER Study Group reported a 27% increase in risk for incident diabetes among patients treated with rosuvastatin compared with placebo [ ]. The statin-associated risk for diabetes may be dose-dependent [ ], and, as demonstrated by a 2013 meta-analysis, dependent on different types of statins: Pravastatin, atorvastatin, and rosuvastatin may have more significant effects on glucose metabolism and diabetes risk [ ].
On the other hand, pitavastatin, a statin that is relatively new and has potent and stable lipid-lowering effects, was suggested to be less diabetogenic. The LIVES study [ ], an observational study in approximately 20,000 Japanese patients enrolled between 2003 and 2005, found no adverse effect of pitavastatin on hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) during a 2-year follow-up. Huang et al. [ ] observed a significant decrease in HbA1c level over 6 months in the poorest controlled tertile among 65 patients with type 2 diabetes who switched from atorvastatin to pitavastatin. In randomized clinical trials, Gumprecht et al. [ ] found that pitavastatin, while having similar lipid-lowering efficacy as atorvastatin, had more neutral effects on fasting blood glucose (FBG) in patients with existing diabetes, and the PROPIT study [ ] demonstrated that pitavastatin, in addition to lifestyle modifications, improved metabolic syndrome scores, apolipoprotein B/A1 ratio, visceral fat/subcutaneous fat ratio, and the Framingham risk score among patients with metabolic syndrome (central obesity and prediabetes).
Studies attempting to replicate these findings, however, were not always successful. For example, Cho et al. [ ] retrospectively analyzed data from 3680 hypercholesterolemic patients without known diabetes or impaired fasting glucose (IFG), and found that pitavastatin, compared to simvastatin, was associated with a significantly higher risk of new-onset diabetes. However, lack of adherence assessment, existence of selection bias, and non-controlled dose of statin might limit the persuasion. Because of these, a rigorously designed randomized controlled trial (RCT), involving head-to-head comparisons between pitavastatin and other statins, is warranted.
The China hemoglobin A1c Metabolism Protection Union Study (CAMPUS) is a multi-center, open-label, two-arm parallel group, non-inferiority RCT primarily aiming to test the hypothesis that pitavastatin, compared to atorvastatin, has a favorable, or, at least, non-detrimental effect on glucose metabolism (as indicated by HbA1c) 12 months after treatment in prediabetics with dyslipidemias and hypertension. The rationale for choosing atorvastatin as the comparator is that the agent is currently the most commonly prescribed statin in the country and that its safety profile is the most well-known [ ].
Secondary objectives of CAMPUS are to compare the effects of pitavastatin 12 months after treatment, to that of atorvastatin, on other measures of glucose metabolism (including fasting plasma glucose [FPG], 2-h plasma glucose [PG] levels after 75-g oral glucose tolerance test [OGTT]), serum lipid levels (i.e., LDL-C, HDL-C, total cholesterol [TC], and triglycerides [TG]), BP control, peripheral vascular function (measured as brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity [baPWV]), serum inflammatory biomarkers (i.e., C-reactive protein [CRP], interleukin-6 [IL-6], tumor necrosis factor-α [TNF-α]), left ventricular mass index (LVMI), and carotid intima-media thickness (CIMT).
Methods
Study Design
The CAMPUS trial is designed as a multi-center, prospective, open-label, 12-month, parallel-group, non-inferiority RCT involving Chinese prediabetics and hypertensives with dyslipidemias (Fig. 1 ). The design of this trial will be described in accordance with the Standard Protocol Items: Recommendations for Interventional Trials (SPIRIT) 2013 Checklist [ , ] (see Additional file 1 ). Fig. 1 Flow diagram of CAMPUS design. The design is reported in accordance with Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) 2010 guidelines [ ]. HbA1c hemoglobin A1c
Study Objectives
Primary Objective
The primary objective of this study is to determine, if pitavastatin 2–4 mg/day is non-inferior to atorvastatin 20–40 mg/day in the primary endpoint of mean change value of HbA1C levels from baseline to termination favorable, in subjects with prediabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidemias in China.
Secondary Objectives
The key secondary objectives are to determine, in subjects with prediabetes, hypertension and dyslipidemias, if pitavastatin 2–4 mg/day is non-inferior to atorvastatin 20–40 mg/day for: Changes from baseline in FPG, 2-h PG after 75-g OGTT levels Proportion of subjects in LDL-C normalization state Changes from baseline in HDL-C, TC, and TG levels Change from baseline in BP levels
Other secondary objectives are to compare, in subjects with prediabetes, hypertension and dyslipidemias, pitavastatin and atorvastatin with respect to: Changes from baseline in baPWV values Changes from baseline in CRP, IL-6, TNF-α levels Changes from baseline in LVMI values Changes from baseline in CIMT values
to assess the safety of pitavastatin and atorvastatin in subjects with prediabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidemias.
Eligibility Criteria
CAMPUS will enroll participants who fulfill all the following inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria:
Inclusion Criteria
Inclusion criteria are shown in Table 1 . Patients enrolled were identified with prediabetes according to American Diabetes Association 2017 criteria [ ]: “Prediabetes” is the term used for individuals with IFG (defined as FPG levels between 100 and 125 mg/dL) and/or impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) (defined as 2-h PG after 75-g OGTT levels between 140 and 199 mg/dL) and/or A1c 5.7–6.4%. Hypertension is identified as systolic blood pressure (SBP) ≥130 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure (DBP) ≥80 mmHg in accordance with a 2017 report of the American guidelines [ ]. Table 1 Participant characteristics Participant selection Inclusion criteria Patients who meet all of the following criteria (a) Age 18–80 years old (b) IFG: 5.6 mmol/L (100 mg/dL) ≤ FPG < 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL), or IGT: 7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dL) ≤ OGTT 2-h PG < 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL), or HbA1c 5.7–6.4% (39–47 mmol/mol) (c) 2.6 mmol/L (100 mg/dL) ≤ LDL-C ≤ 5.2 mmol/L (200 mg/dL), and TG < 5.7 mmol/L (500 mg/dL) (d) 130 mmHg ≤ SBP < 180 mmHg, or 80 mmHg ≤ DBP < 110 mmHg or ongoing anti-hypertensive therapy (e) Patients volunteered for the study and signed informed consent Exclusion criteria Patients who meet any of the following criteria (a) Past history of hypersensitivity to the study drug (b) Diagnosed diabetes (c) Severe liver disease (including ALT or AST ≥ 2.5-fold the normal upper limit), biliary obstruction (d) Ongoing treatment with cyclosporine within 2 weeks; (e) Renal dysfunction, including endogenous creatinine clearance male < 120 mL/min, female < 105 mL/min, serum creatinine ≥ 2 mg/dL (186 μmol/L), Renal function progressive decline, GFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m −2 (f) Diagnosed or past history of ASCVD (including ACS, SCAD, revascularization, ICM, ischemic stroke, TIA, peripheral atherosclerotic disease, etc.) (g) SBP ≥ 180 mmHg, or DBP ≥ 110 mmHg (h) Ongoing treatment with beta blockers, diuretic (i) Secondary hypertension, including sleep apnea syndrome, primary aldosteronism, renal arterial stenosis, pheochromocytoma, Cushing’s syndrome, aorta diseases, drug-induced hypertension (j) Ongoing treatment with statins, fibrates, and/or cation exchange resins within 2 weeks (k) Pancreatic disease (l) History of gastrectomy, short bowel syndrome (m) Ongoing hormone replacement therapy (n) Diagnosed or suspected malignant tumor (o) Familial hypercholesterolemia (p) Any diseases may limit the efficacy or safety of the study (q) Pregnant or possibly pregnant woman, or breastfeeding woman, or woman who wishes to become pregnant during study participation (r) Patient who was not judged as eligible by the investigator/coinvestigator IFG impaired fast glucose, FPG fasting plasma glucose, IGT impaired glucose tolerance, OGTT oral glucose tolerance test, PG plasma glucose, HbA1c hemoglobin A1c, LDL-C low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, TG triglycerides, SBP systolic blood pressure, DBP diastolic blood pressure, ALT alanine aminotransferase, AST aspartate aminotransferase, GFR glomerular filtration rate, ASCVD arteriosclerotic cardiovascular disease, ACS acute coronary syndrome, SCAD stable coronary artery disease, ICM ischemic cardiomyopathy, TIA transient ischemic attack
Exclusion Criteria
Major exclusion criteria include diagnosis of diabetes mellitus (DM), use of statins/fibrates and/or cation exchange resins, receipt of hormone replacement therapy, current pancreatic disease, malignancy, history of gastrectomy, and history of arteriosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) (Table 1 ).
Study Setting and Recruitment
Participants will be recruited from both out-patients and in-patients of 15 hospitals in the Eastern, Central, Southern, Northwestern, Southwestern Regions of China, each region representing different Chinese ethnicities (Han and other ethnic minorities). Advertisement approved by the Research Ethics Committee will be used to promote recruitment.
Interventions
Each participant will have equal probability of being assigned to one of two treatments: (1) pitavastatin calcium (BANGZHI®) tablet 2 mg/day and (2) atorvastatin calcium (LIPITOR®) tablet 20 mg/day. In addition, upon treatment initiation, all participants will be interviewed by trained physicians, and, if deemed necessary, advised to undergo lifestyle modifications regarding dietary and exercise habits.
Participants will be followed for trial outcomes (described later), as well as body mass index (BMI), ALT, AST, and creatine kinase (CK) levels at 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months after treatment initiation. At the 3-month follow-up visit, plasma LDL-C will be measured, and, for the participant who failed to meet individual lipid-lowering treatment target stratified by risks according to the China guideline [ ], treatment doses will be escalated (pitavastatin 4 mg/day or atorvastatin 40 mg/day) (Table 2 ). The follow-up period is 1 year, and the study is anticipated to be completed in December 2020. Table 2 Individual lipid-lowering treatment target Risk degree Individual LDL-C target Low/moderate < 3.4 mmol/L (130 mg/dL) High < 2.6 mmol/L (100 mg/dL) Extreme high < 1.8 mmol/L (70 mg/dL) LDL-C low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
Participant Timeline
A diagram summarizing the timelines for CAMPUS is presented in Fig. 2 . Fig. 2 Participant timelines overview of all visits and tests scheduled in CAMPUS trial. a Hepatic function refers to TBil total bilirubin, ALT alanine aminotransferase, AST aspartate aminotransferase, GGT gamma glutamine transferase, ALP alkaline phosphatase, and ALB albumin. b Renal function refers to SCr serum creatinine, BUN blood urea nitrogen and blood uric acid. c Measured in childbearing age women only. d Measured at select centers only. BMI body mass index, FPG fasting plasma glucose, PG plasma glucose, OGTT oral glucose tolerance test, HbA1c hemoglobin A1c, CRP C-reactive protein, IL-6 interleukin-6, TNF-α tumor necrosis factor-α, hCG human chorionic gonadotrophin, ECG electrocardiogram, LVMI left ventricular mass index, CIMT carotid intima-media thickness, baPWV brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity
Adherence to Intervention
At each follow-up visit, participants will be counseled on the importance of adherence to medications, required to report the amounts of medications consumed, and return any unused medications. The amounts of medications distributed, consumed, returned, as well as reasons for non-adherence to medications are recorded by trained physicians using the case report forms (CRFs). The “actual dose/anticipated dose” is calculated as a measure of drug compliance. Non-compliance is defined as a score of less than 0.8, or more than 1.20.
Concomitant Interventions
Medications to treat concomitant conditions are allowed and are recorded using the CRFs at baseline and each follow-up visit. Participants are encouraged to remain on the same dosage of these medications unless advised otherwise by medical professionals. Participants who used any lipid-lowering drugs other than the assigned trial medications are considered to have dropped out of the trial.
Intervention Modification
Participants are advised to promptly report if they experience any of the following symptoms during the trial: (1) any symptoms of allergic reactions (including rash and pruritus), (2) muscle pain, and (3) darkening of urine.
Trial medications are discontinued if participants experienced the serious adverse events (SAEs) of rhabdomyolysis with myoglobinuria and acute renal failure, and myopathy (including myositis), liver enzyme abnormalities (clinical manifestations of serious liver injury and/or hyperbilirubinemia and/or unexplained persistent transaminase elevations), or allergic reactions. In addition, participation in the trial will be terminated if any of the following occurred: (1) withdrawal of consent, (2) pregnancy, (3) lack of adherence and loss to follow-up; (4) newly diagnosed or suspected conditions fulfilling the exclusion criteria (see Table 1 ), and (5) other medical situations preventing participants from benefitting from the trial, or participants deemed no longer eligible by the investigators.
Randomization
Participants will be sequentially allocated to experimental or control arm with 1:1 ratio using center-stratified block randomization, with a block size of four. The allocation sequence is generated using SAS V9.4 software by statistician prior to study initiation. This sequence is secured in separated computer system, to which only the study statistician responsible for randomization will have access. To limit selection bias, well-sealed, opaque, and sequentially numbered assignment envelopes are used to ensure allocation concealment so that investigators/participants do not know the allocation until the interventions are assigned.
Blinding
CAMPUS adopts an open-label design. Nonetheless, primary outcome assessors are masked as to the group assignment. Also, laboratory technicians performing blood/urine tests and cardiologists performing LVMI and CIMT measurements will be blinded to treatment allocation, thus reducing observer bias to the greatest extent possible.
Outcome Measures
Plasma HbA1c measurements will be performed upon treatment initiation (baseline), and follow-up visits at months 3, 6, and 12. Other measures of BMI, FPG, and levels of serum lipids, ALT, AST, and CK will be measured at study initiation and at each visit. Two-hour PG after 75-g OGTT levels will be measured at study initiation and at each visit except the first month. CRP, IL-6, TNF-α, LVMI, CIMT, and baPWV will be measured at study initiation and thereafter at visit every 6 months in qualified centers and are not compulsory required.
The primary outcome is the difference in HbA1c levels comparing follow-up visit at 12 months to baseline between two treatment groups. Secondary outcomes are the differences in proportion of subjects in LDL-C normalization state, levels of FPG, OGTT-2 h PG, TC, TG, HDL-C, apolipoprotein B, apolipoprotein A1, BP, CRP, IL-6, and TNF-α, as well as baPWV, LVMI, and CIMT (measured at select centers only) comparing 12-month visit to baseline between the two groups.
Sample Size Calculation
Sample size calculation is based on the primary outcome, namely change in HbA1c from baseline to follow-up at 12 months. Based on findings from past clinical studies, which suggested changes in HbA1c of 0.0 ± 0.9% after 104 weeks pitavastatin treatment in hypercholesterolemic patients with DM [ ], and 0.4 ± 1.0% after 3 months atorvastatin treatment in patients with hyperlipidemia and type 2 DM [ ], we considered a non-inferiority threshold of 0.1% and calculated a sample size of 158 per trial arm, which allowed 80% power and 2.5% one-sided type I error rate to detect such an effect size. Accounting for an estimated drop-out rate of 20%, the sample size was finalized to 198 participants per arm (396 in total).
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis will be conducted by the SAS V9.4 software using a two-tailed 0.05 significance level. Baseline characteristics of trial arm will be presented using descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation for normal distributed continuous variables, median and inter-quartile range for abnormal distributed continuous variables, count, and percentage for categorical variables). For comparisons between two groups, t test or rank sum test will be used for quantitative variables, the chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test will be used for qualitative variables, and the Wilcoxon rank sum test will be used for ordinal variables.
The primary outcome of this study, difference in changes of HbA1c levels from baseline to 12 months between the two intervention arms, will be estimated using a safety set in which all randomized participants with at-least one follow-up visit data will be analyzed. Covariance analysis model will be fitted for primary outcome with covariates of center and baseline HbA1c level. Data will be presented as adjusted mean differences (95% confidence interval) and corresponding p values.
We will further conduct full and per-protocol analysis to evaluate the differences in certain secondary outcomes between the two groups.
Discussion
Statins are key to primary prevention in prediabetics and other populations at high risk for diabetes and CVD. However, it has been suggested that certain statins were diabetogenic, whereas others are not. For example, studies have shown that atorvastatin increased the risk of hyperglycemia and incident diabetes [ , , ]. By contrast, pitavastatin was suggested to have minimal effect on glucose metabolism, as indicated by HbA1c, FBG, and fasting plasma insulin [ , , ]. Further, it has been shown that pitavastatin was associated with a significantly lower risk of diabetes in IGT patients, and hypertensives seemed to be particularly prone to statin-related glucose problems [ ]. These studies, however, were majority observational, without head-to-head design, conducted in primarily existing type 2 DM patients without hypertension, and were limited in short follow-up period, existing selection bias and uncertain participation adherence. To date, the pathophysiology as to why pitavastatin might cause less disruption to glucose metabolism remains understudied. An in vitro study demonstrated lower cell viability (which reflects cytotoxicity) and lower insulin secretion rates in human pancreatic islet β cells, and lower glucose uptake rates in human skeletal muscle cells after administration of pitavastatin, compared to atorvastatin [ ], and a few clinical studies suggested that the anti-atherosclerotic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-diabetogenic properties of pitavastatin might be attributable to its ability to reduce insulin resistance [ ] and induce release of adiponectin [ ].
The present study, designed for a head-to-head comparison between the effect of pitavastatin and that of atorvastatin on glucose metabolism in Chinese prediabetics with dyslipidemias and hypertension, will shed light on the mechanisms underlying the differences in diabetogenicity among statins, expand the current evidence base on primary prevention of cardiometabolic disease, and provide future guidance on the choice of lipid-lowering therapy in relevant populations.
The strength of CAMPUS lies in its multi-center, randomized controlled design, and sufficient power to detect a clinically significant non-inferiority threshold comparing the effect of pitavastatin to that of atorvastatin on glucose metabolism. However, it has some limitations. First, CAMPUS adopts an open-label design and is therefore subject to introduce bias. Second, our lab tests might not be able to fully capture the potential pleotropic effects of pitavastatin/atorvastatin on glucose metabolism.
CAMPUS is the first randomized clinical trial to investigate the effect of pitavastatin, compared to atorvastatin, on glucose metabolism in Chinese prediabetics with hypertension. Findings of this study may hint on the pathophysiology underlying diabetogenicity associated with certain statins and facilitate the improvement of primary prevention in patients at risk for diabetes and CVD.