Introduction
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the number one cause of death globally. In addition to life-style counseling, the use of refined biomarkers for classical cardiovascular risk factors and secondary prevention via drug therapy are the recommended approaches to best prevent CVDs and improve cardiovascular health [ ]. A variety of biomarkers have been proposed, but the added value of using multiple biomarkers was negligible since their use, either individually or in any combination, did not improve the prediction of outcomes in the Framingham study [ ]. Therefore, classical risk scores may underestimate the risk of cardiovascular events for early prevention, such as for asymptomatic hypertensive subjects. However, target organ damage may help identify patients at high risk of developing CVDs since it integrates the cumulative effects of cardiovascular risk factors with aging and can be detected before clinical events occur, at a stage when intervention may reverse damage. Damage to the arterial tree itself, such as increased arterial stiffness, has raised increasing interest as a potential target organ damage marker [ ]. Indeed, studies showed a close relationship between arterial stiffness and microvascular damage in the heart, brain, and kidney [ ]. Such changes may occur early in the course of diseases associated with premature vascular aging. Therefore, arterial stiffness is a key determinant and, in particular, can be considered as a measure of the cumulative influence of cardiovascular risk factors with aging on the arterial tree. Measurement of arterial stiffness could avoid patients being mistakenly classified as at low or moderate risk. Additionally, traditional therapies for arterial stiffness targeting the renin-angiotensin system and beta-blockers reduce the physiologic arterial stiffness indirectly, by lowering the mean blood pressure, but most do not have a direct effect on the mechanical properties of large arteries. If arterial stiffness is a precursor to hypertension, decreasing blood pressure alone is not enough. Actually, elderly patients with isolated systolic hypertension, which is the form most directly related to increases in artery stiffness, are resistant to traditional therapies [ ]. Therapies or strategies that directly alter the stiffness of the vessel wall may be more effective because they would halt the negative feedback cycle of stiff vessels increasing the load on the heart [ ].
Arterial stiffness, an inevitable consequence of the aging process in humans, produces characteristic changes in the arterial pulse [ ]. Enhanced arterial stiffness may arise not only as a result of age-related and irreversible degenerative arteriosclerotic changes but also as a result of imbalance between nitric oxide (NO) and endothelin-1 caused by reversible endothelial dysfunction [ ]. Increased arterial stiffness is also attributable to a progressive increase in collagen deposition and vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) hypertrophy, resulting in a relative decrease in elastin content [ ]. Thus, the traditional two of three layers (i.e., intima, media, and adventitia) in the vascular wall are involved in arterial stiffness. However, there is an additional layer, perivascular adipose tissue (PVAT), which surrounds most of the blood vessels. An increasing number of studies uncovered that PVAT secretes large numbers of vasoactive substances [ , , ] that affect vascular function or responding to signals from the endothelial cells (ECs) and VSMCs. PVAT is de facto a distinct functional vascular layer (the fourth layer, designated as “adipotima”) playing an active role in the control of vascular (dys) function in (patho) physiological conditions, and should be included when investigating arterial stiffness of the vascular wall [ ].
Furthermore, obesity is associated with increased CVDs. Obesity in general and skinfold thickness in hypertensive individuals have been found to directly associate with increased arterial stiffness and weight loss improves arterial compliance [ , ]. Importantly, PVAT mass is increased in obese conditions. The results from the Framingham Offspring and Third Generation cohorts showed that the PVAT volume was associated with higher thoracic and abdominal aortic dimensions, independent of age, sex, and cardiovascular risk factors, including body mass index and visceral adipose tissue volume [ ]. This result strongly supports the notion that PVAT contributes to aortic remodeling. Our current knowledge on the relationship between PVAT and arterial stiffness is very limited. In the clinical settings, evaluation of the PVAT mass and its correlation to CVDs is increasing using CT and/or MRI. One of the limitations of these non-invasive diagnoses is that the function of PVAT cannot be properly evaluated. Therefore, it is unclear whether arterial stiffness in obese subjects is owing to the PVAT expansion, especially for those presenting dysfunctional PVAT.
Interestingly, insulin sensitivity is preserved in spite of massive obesity in ob/ob mice with overexpression mitoNEET in both WAT and BAT. Furthermore, the adipocyte size is normal in mitoNEET transgenic ob/ob mice compared to non-transgenic ob/ob mice [ ], indicating that hyperplastic obesity (increase numbers of normal adipocytes) is not leading to insulin resistance. MitoNEET is an iron-containing protein integral to the outer mitochondrial membrane that regulates oxidative capacity [ ]. Pioglitazone, an insulin-sensitizing drug and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-γ (PPARγ) agonist, significantly reduced arterial stiffness in those patients [ ] and was later shown to bind mitoNEET [ ]. However, to date, it is unknown whether mitoNEET exerts a predominant function in adipose tissues leading to protective roles in arterial stiffness. We previously identified that mitoNEET was preferentially expressed in PVAT compared to subcutaneous or visceral WAT and was among the genes responsible for cold-induced thermogenesis [ ]. Additionally, mitoNEET expression level in PVAT was significantly reduced in the Pgc1α-deficient mice. We further documented that mitoNEET in PVAT was upregulated upon cold stimulation and prevented atherosclerosis development [ ]. Furthermore, overexpression of mitoNEET in white adipocytes upregulated a browning signature program and limited expansion of adipose tissues upon high-fat diet (HFD) [ , ]. Here, we show that mice without functional PVAT or wild-type mice subjected to diet-induced obesity have reduced pulse wave, indicative of increased arterial stiffness. This was associated with a dramatic reduction in mitoNEET in hypertrophic PVAT induced by HFD. Pioglitazone treatment enhanced mitoNEET expression while PVAT-specific overexpression of mitoNEET prevented arterial stiffness in mice, thus uncovering a direct protective role of PVAT and local mitoNEET in arterial stiffness.
Materials and Methods
Animals
We previously reported the mice lacking PVAT (SMPG KO) which were generated by crossing PPARγ flox/flox mice with the SM22α-Cre knock-in mice and were subsequently crossed to the ApoE knockout background [ , ]. The diet-induced obesity (DIO) male C57BL/6J mice (fed with a 60% high-fat diet from Research Diets Inc. D12492, HFD) were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (stock # 380050) and kept on the same HFD, as indicated in the experiments. The C57BL/6J DIO control mice (stock# 380056) were provided a low fat diet with the same protein content as the diet provided to C57BL/6J DIO mice. The 1-year-old male C57BL/6J mice were administrated with 2 mg/kg/day pioglitazone (Cayman Chemical, CAS# 111025-46-8) gavage daily for 1 month under CD. The age-matched C57BL/6J mice received 0.1% DMSO in 0.9% saline as control. Mice with brown adipocyte-specific overexpression of mitoNEET (mitoNEET-Tg) in the C57BL/6J background created as previously reported [ ] and appropriate littermate mice served as wild-type controls. The mice were housed in a temperature-controlled animal facility with a 12-h:12-h light-dark cycle and free access to water and CD or HFD as described above or indicated in each case. The study protocol was approved by the Animal Research Ethics Committee of the University of Michigan.
Surgical Removal of the Interscapular Brown Adipose Tissue
The interscapular brown adipose tissue (iBAT) was surgically removed in the 7-week-old mice as we previously reported [ , ]. Briefly, the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation and the back-neck skin was opened to expose the interscapular BAT. Next, the intact iBAT in interscapular trigonal pyramidal region was completely separated and removed using an electronic cauterizer. The skin wound was closed and the mice were allowed to recover for 1 week at room temperature (22 °C) before treatment with HFD or chow diet (CD).
Pulse Wave Velocity Measurements
Arterial stiffness in mice was evaluated by determining the carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity (PWV) by simultaneously measuring blood pressure (BP) at the aortic arch and iliac arteries as previously reported [ ]. Briefly, each mouse was anesthetized with urethane (10 mg/kg i.p.) and one 1.4F micro-tip pressure transducer catheter (model SPR-671; Millar Instruments, Houston, TX) was introduced into the aortic root via the right carotid artery to measure proximal aortic BP, while another 1.4F micro-tip pressure transducer catheter was inserted into the iliac artery bifurcation via the right femoral artery to record distal aortic BP. The BP waves from the two catheters were simultaneously acquired and analyzed with the Powerlab 8/30 data-acquisition system and chart software (AD Instruments, Colorado Springs, CO). After 30 min of BP wave recording, the mouse was euthanized by an overdose of urethane. The distance along the aorta between the two catheter tips was measured (∆ d ). The time delay (∆ t ) between the proximal and the distal BP waves was measured in one cardiac cycle of two waves in every 3-min window. The PWV was calculated by ∆ d /∆ t . The mean of 10-time PWV calculations was the final PWV for one mouse.
Quantitative Real-time Reverse-transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
The PVAT of mice at the end-point of the experiments were harvested and frozen in liquid nitrogen for mRNA analysis. Total RNA was isolated from tissues using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). The mRNA levels were measured by quantitative real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR) using a Bio-Rad thermocycler and a SYBR green kit (Bio-Rad). The mouse primers used for each gene were, respectively, as follows:
IL-6, 5′-TTCCCTACTTCACAAGTC-3′ and 5′-GTACAAAGCTCATGGAGA-3′;
TNF-α, 5′-CTCAGATCATCTTCTCAA-3′ and 5′-GGTTTGCCGAGTAGATCT-3′;
Mcp-1, 5′-CACCAGCACCAGCCAACTCTCACT-3′ and 5′-CATTCCTTCTTGGGGTCAGCACAG-3′.
Histological Analysis
The PVAT were harvested and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (pH 8.0) for tissue processing and histological analysis. After dehydration, the PVAT was embedded in paraffin wax according to standard laboratory procedures. Sections of 5 μm were stained with H&E and Trichrome Masson’s staining for histopathological examination with light microscopy.
Statistical Analysis
All data were evaluated with a two-tailed, unpaired Student’s t test. The data were expressed as mean ± SD. A value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Lack of Functional PVAT Promotes Arterial Stiffness
We previously generated VSMC selective PPARγ knockout (SMPG KO) mice by cross-breeding SM22α-Cre knock-in mice with PPARγ flox/flox mice. Unexpectedly, SMPG KO mice display a complete loss of PVAT with normal glucose metabolism, development of white adipose tissue (WAT), and iBAT [ ]. HFD feeding of the SMPG KO in the ApoE −/− background mice (SMPG KO/ApoE −/− , double knock out) dramatically induced atherosclerosis development [ ], which might be associated with arterial stiffness in aging. Therefore, we measured the PWV in the 1-year-old SMPG KO/ApoE −/− mice fed with a CD. Consistent with our previous report [ ], the SMPG KO/ApoE −/− mice showed increased spontaneous atherosclerotic lesions than the littermate control ApoE −/− mice (data not shown). However, the systolic BP in the 1-year-old SMPG KO/ApoE −/− mice was comparable with that in age-matched ApoE −/− control mice. Whereas when compared to the ApoE −/− mice, the diastolic BP in the SMPG KO/ApoE −/− mice was increased, which results in a reduced pulse pressure (Fig. 1 ). Additionally, the transmission time (∆ t ) of the BP wave from the aortic root to the iliac artery in SMPG KO/ApoE −/− mice was significantly shorter than that in ApoE −/− mice. Therefore, the PWV was significantly higher in the SMPG KO/ApoE −/− aorta than that in the control mice (Fig. 1 b), indicating increased arterial stiffness in the mice lacking PVAT. Fig. 1 Arterial stiffness in mice lacking PVAT. a One-year-old male mice of the indicated genotype and fed with a chow diet were anesthetized with urethane (10 mg/kg i.p.). The blood pressure wave was recorded with 1.4F micro-tip pressure transducer catheters placed at the aortic root and bifurcation of femoral artery, respectively. The lower panel was enlarged to show the delay of wave transmission from the aortic root to the bifurcation of iliac artery. ∆ t is the transmission time of the wave from the aortic root to the iliac artery. a The systolic blood pressure (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) were analyzed with the Powerlab 8/30 data-acquisition system and chart software. The pulse pressure (PP) was calculated by SBP-DBP. The pulse wave velocity (PWV) was calculated by the transmission speed of the blood pressure wave from the aorta between the aortic root and the bifurcation of the femoral artery. n = 8 mice/group. Data shown as mean ± SD. Unpaired Student’s t test
Increased Arterial Stiffness in Mice with Diet-Induced Hypertrophic PVAT
The above SMPG KO/ApoE −/− mice were completely devoid of functional PVAT [ ]. However, increase of adipocyte size under obese condition leads to dysfunction of adipose tissues, which is negatively correlated with CVD risks and positively correlated with adipose tissue inflammation [ ]. Low-grade inflammation and fibrosis in the vessel wall was shown to increase arterial stiffness, and reduction of inflammation and fibrosis can reduce arterial stiffness [ , ]. Next, we investigated inflammation and fibrosis in PVAT upon DIO in C57BL/6J mice fed with an HFD for 48 weeks starting at 6 weeks of age. As shown in Fig. 2 a, the PVAT mass was dramatically expanded upon HFD feeding. The body weight of the DIO mice was significantly increased when compared with age-matched mice fed with a CD (Fig. 2 b). The size of adipocytes in PVAT was markedly increased in the DIO mice and this was associated with increased fibrosis in PVAT apart from that in adventitia and media layers (Fig. 2 c). Meanwhile, the PWV was significantly increased in the DIO mice (Fig. 2 d), indicating arterial stiffness in DIO mice fed with HFD for 48 weeks. Fig. 2 Arterial stiffness in diet-induced obese mice. a Representative photographs showing the PVAT mass in the C57BL/6J male mice fed with a chow diet (CD) or high-fat diet (HFD) for 48 weeks, starting at 6 weeks old. b Body weight of the mice in ( a ) at the end of the experiment. n = 5 mice/group. Data shown as mean ± SD. Unpaired Student’s t test. c Representative Trichrome Masson’s staining for fibrosis (blue color and arrows) in the thoracic aorta, including the PVAT, in the mice in ( a ). bar = 50 μm. d The PWV was measured as indicated in Fig. 1 at the end of experimental protocol in the mice in ( a ). n = 5 mice/group. Data shown as mean ± SD. Unpaired Student’s t test
Distinct Expression Patterns of mitoNEET in Hypertrophic and Hyperplastic PVAT
Thiazolidinediones (TZDs) are insulin-sensitizing PPARγ agonists known to affect the morphology of adipose tissue apart from improving insulin sensitivity [ , , ]. TZDs have favorable effects on arterial stiffness in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus [ , , , ]. However, consistent with the known obesogenic side effect of pioglitazone treatment, the PVAT mass of 1-year-old male C57BL/6J mice upon 2 mg/kg/day pioglitazone treatment for 1 month was significantly increased (Fig. 3 a). However, the sizes of adipocytes in PVAT of mice treated with pioglitazone were comparable to those of mice with vehicle treatment (Fig. 3 b), suggesting a hyperplastic PVAT expansion. Interestingly, mitoNEET expression was significantly increased in PVAT upon pioglitazone treatment (Fig. 3 c). However, mitoNEET expression in PVAT was significantly reduced in the DIO mice with HFD feeding for 48 weeks (Fig. 3 d), in the mice in Fig. 2 . This indicates that mitoNEET is distinctly regulated in hypertrophic and hyperplastic PVAT. Fig. 3 Pioglitazone-induced hyperplastic PVAT expansion. a PVAT mass of 1-year-old male C57BL/6J mice treated with 0.1% DMSO or pioglitazone (2 mg/kg/body weight) for 1 month. n = 8 mice/group. Data shown as mean ± SD. Unpaired Student’s t test. b Representative H&E staining of PVAT in the mice used in ( a ) showing similar morphology (small lipid droplets) in adipocytes in PVAT with or without pioglitazone treatment. c mitoNEET mRNA levels in PVAT of mice treated with DMSO or pioglitazone for 1 month and d chow diet (CD) or high-fat diet (HFD) for 48 weeks. n = 5 mice/group. Data shown as mean ± SD. Unpaired Student’s t test
Increased mitoNEET in PVAT Prevented Arterial Stiffness
To investigate the effects of mitoNEET from PVAT on arterial stiffness, we used mice with brown adipocyte-specific overexpression of mitoNEET (mitoNEET-Tg) as we previously reported [ ]. We surgically removed the iBAT in 7-week-old mitoNEET-Tg and age-matched wild-type control mice to exclude the effects of concurrent mitoNEET overexpression in BAT. Next, both mitoNEET-Tg and wild-type control mice were fed with an HFD for 48 weeks starting at 8 weeks of age. As shown in Fig. 4 a, the body weight was comparable between the wild-type and mitoNEET-Tg mice fed with HFD. The PWV of mitoNEET-Tg mice was significantly lower than that of wild-type mice under HFD (Fig. 4 b), suggesting that overexpression of mitoNEET in PVAT prevents HFD-induced arterial stiffness. Additionally, we determined the fibrosis and expression of inflammatory genes in PVAT from these mice. As shown in Fig. 5 a, fibrosis within the vascular wall was reduced in mitoNEET-Tg mice when compared with the wild-type controls. The mRNA levels of IL-6, Mcp-1, and TNFα in PVAT from the mitoNEET-Tg mice were significantly lower than those in PVAT from wild-type control mice (Fig. 5 b). These results indicate that mitoNEET in PVAT inhibited diet-induced arterial stiffness (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 4 Overexpression of mitoNEET in PVAT prevented arterial stiffness. a Body weight of 1-year-old male mitoNEET-Tg and littermate wild-type mice fed with a high-fat diet (HFD) for 48 weeks starting 6 weeks of age. n = 6 mice/group. Data shown as mean ± SD. Unpaired Student’s t test. n.s., not significant. b PWV of the mice in ( a ), measured as indicated in Fig. 1 at the end of the experiment. n = 6 mice/group. Data shown as mean ± SD. Unpaired Student’s t test Fig. 5 Overexpression of mitoNEET in PVAT inhibited fibrosis and inflammation. a Trichrome Masson’s staining for fibrosis (blue color and arrows) in thoracic aorta including PVAT in mitoNEET-Tg and littermate wild-type control mice fed with a high-fat diet (HFD) for 48 weeks starting at 6 weeks old. b The mRNA levels of the inflammatory genes IL-6, Mcp-1, and TNFα in PVAT from mitoNEET-Tg and littermate wild-type control mice fed with a high-fat diet (HFD) for 48 weeks starting at 6 weeks old. n = 5 mice/group. Data shown as mean ± SD. Unpaired Student’s t test Fig. 6 Graphic summarizes. High-fat diet (HFD) feeding induced PVAT hypertrophic expansion, associated with mitoNEET inhibition, increased PVAT inflammation, and fibrosis, leading to arterial stiffness. Pioglitazone, an insulin sensitizer that can bind mitoNEET, could induce PVAT hyperplastic expansion instead. However, the hyperplastic PVAT was still functional and shows reduced PVAT inflammation and fibrosis, thus resulting in inhibition of arterial stiffness progression. The red arrows indicate the pathological effects of HFD-induced arterial stiffness while the black arrows indicate the protective effects of pioglitazone/mitoNEET in arterial stiffness
Discussion
In humans, the major adipose tissue is WAT and is located in the subcutaneous and visceral regions (termed as subcutaneous WAT and visceral WAT, respectively). BAT exists in human infants and gradually disappears during growth to adulthood. However, using PET technology, active BAT was found in the clavicular, cervical, suprarenal, and periaortic regions of adult humans [ , ]. WAT has been recognized as a tissue for energy storage [ ], while the BAT is able to generate heat and incur in energy expenditure [ ]. Excessive accumulation of WAT is highly associated with CVDs and complications. Due to opposite functions between WAT and BAT, strategies for activation of BAT are enthusiastically pursued to prevent obesity and associated disorders. Even if the majority of adipose tissues in adult humans are WAT, the WAT in different locations varies in its functional characteristics and biochemical profiles. For example, the visceral WAT is more harmful and associated to insulin resistance and cardiovascular events due to its higher inflammatory characteristics than subcutaneous WAT. Recently, the subcutaneous WAT was recognized as a beige adipose tissue because of high expression levels of UCP-1, suggesting that subcutaneous WAT could have thermogenesis characteristics. Furthermore, circulating hormones such as atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21), and irisin are able to promote “browning” of subcutaneous WAT. Interestingly, recent studies strongly suggest that obesity is common in heart failure (HF) and is associated with improved outcomes, a finding often termed the “obesity paradox” [ , , ]. However, it is unknown whether the phenomenon of “obesity paradox” is mainly caused by the accumulation of subcutaneous WAT.
Unlike traditional WAT and BAT, the PVAT is adjacent and surrounds most blood vessels. The adipocytes in PVAT of rodents are similar to the adipocytes in BAT, while in human they look like “beige” adipocytes. Beige adipocytes have a gene expression pattern distinct from either white or brown adipocytes, although beige cells promote energy expenditure due to its high level of UCP-1 in mitochondria, similarly to classic brown adipocytes [ ]. Nevertheless, the intrinsic characteristic of energy expenditure of brown and beige adipocytes highlights the potential importance of functional PVAT as a target for the treatment of obesity and associated CVDs. We define functional PVAT as the PVAT which exhibits normal endocrine characteristics in physiological conditions. However, the PVAT mass is expanded in obesity and in diabetes, in conjunction with the presence of hypertrophic adipocytes, the accumulation of inflammatory cells, and a shift in the production of various adipokines and inflammatory cytokines. Accordingly, we define PVAT dysfunction as the PVAT in which the normal endocrine characteristics are altered in pathophysiological conditions. Recent studies support the hypothesis that local paracrine/autocrine factors secreted by dysfunctional PVAT may provide novel mechanistic links between obesity and associated CVDs such as atherosclerosis [ , ] and hypertension, although a causal role of PVAT in CVDs has yet to be fully established.
Arterial stiffness is an inevitable consequence of the aging process and is considered an early stage in the development of CVDs. Non-invasive measurements of arterial stiffness by PWV are accepted as prospective markers for CVD risk. Yet, it is unclear whether functional PVAT is beneficial for vessel compliance and dysfunctional PVAT promotes arterial stiffness. It was suggested a potential “outside-in” mechanism for arterial stiffness evidenced by complement C3 and C4 in PVAT likely binding to collagen and elastin fibers in the adventitia [ ]. Also, the aortic PVAT of ob/ob mice was proinflammatory and pro-oxidative and associated with increased aortic PWV [ ]. In this study, we showed that the aortic PWV was greatly increased in mice lacking PVAT, suggesting that PVAT may be involved in arterial stiffness. As we previously reported, the brown-like PVAT is essential to maintain vascular homeostasis [ , , , ]. Loss of brown-like PVAT promoted vascular neointima formation [ ], development of aneurysm [ ], and atherosclerosis [ ] in mice. However, the major limitation of that initial model lacking PVAT was the concurrent PPARγ deletion in VSMCs, which might contribute to the observed phenotype as well. Therefore, we incorporated another model where PVAT dysfunction was induced by HFD. Consistent with the data from the genetic ob/ob mice [ ], the DIO mice also showed highly increased arterial stiffness. Even though the PVAT mass is greatly increased in DIO mice, we acknowledge that the adipose tissues in other depots are increased in these obese mice as well. Those hypertrophic adipose tissues, other than PVAT, might release circulating factors which target the vascular wall, and herein contribute to the arterial stiffness. On the contrary, pioglitazone and other TZDs were reported to improve vascular compliance. Interestingly, the overall PVAT mass is increased in the mice with pioglitazone treatment. However, unlike in the diet-induced model where hypertrophic PVAT mass accumulation led to reduced mitoNEET expression, the pioglitazone induced a hyperplasic PVAT mass accumulation, which was associated with an increase in mitoNEET expression in PVAT. Since we treated the mice with pioglitazone systemically, we cannot rule out potential effects of the drug on other organs, especially adipose tissues, which might prevent arterial stiffness. The most reasonable strategy to overcome this limitation would be to generate PVAT-specific PPARγ knockout mice to be treated with pioglitazone. However, based on our best knowledge, with the current technologies, this is not feasible since PVAT is brown-like adipose tissue, and the concurrent PPARγ deletion in BAT will cause a new limitation.
Additional off-target effects of TZDs and, in particular pioglitazone, such as that on mitoNEET described below [ ], are still unclear, and might be involved in the protective effects of pioglitazone on arterial stiffness. Therefore, we adapted our brown adipocyte-specific mitoNEET transgenic mice to investigate the roles of mitoNEET in PVAT on arterial stiffness. MitoNEET is a dimeric mitochondrial outer membrane protein and a key regulator of mitochondrial function and lipid homeostasis. Loss of mitoNEET in cells decreases the total cellular mitochondrial volume and cellular respiration [ ]. mitoNEET reduces β-oxidation rates in adipocytes. Adipocyte-specific overexpression of mitoNEET driven by the aP2 promoter induced severe obesity in ob/ob mice, without insulin resistance. Interestingly, adipocyte size was normal in those mitoNEET transgenic obese mice despite accumulation of subcutaneous WAT mass [ ]. However, mitoNEET is preferentially expressed in PVAT and BAT compared to the other aorta layers and WAT, strongly indicating that mitoNEET plays an important role in PVAT biology [ ]. Another interesting phenotype of adipocyte-specific overexpression of mitoNEET was that fibrosis was rarely found in the adipose tissue [ ], and importantly, overexpression of mitoNEET in adipocytes induces browning [ ], suggesting that mitoNEET could maintain the adipocytes in a “brown-like” functional status. We previously reported that mitoNEET in PVAT was critical to maintain PVAT functional brown-like characteristics. Overexpression of mitoNEET in PVAT upregulated expression of thermogenic genes under cold conditions, and mitoNEEET-Tg mice were cold tolerant. Additionally, mice with the mitoNEET-Tg in an ApoE deficiency background and fed with a high-cholesterol diet showed reduced atherosclerosis [ ]. To largely reduce the potential effects on arterial stiffness of mitoNEET in other BAT depots due to Ucp1-driven expression of the transgene, we surgically removed the interscapular BAT in this study. However, we acknowledge that there are multiple depots of BAT in mice, and it is currently impossible to remove all BAT. So far, surgical removal of interscapular BAT is the best strategy to limit the contribution of BAT other than PVAT.
Using a combination of models, we documented that diet-induced obesity increased arterial stiffness associated with decreased mitoNEET expression in PVAT, and that overexpression of mitoNEET in PVAT prevented HFD-induced arterial stiffness associated with decreased PVAT inflammation. In this study, we did not treat the mitoNEET-Tg mice with pioglitazone because of the numerous side effects of pioglitazone found in clinical applications. We will explore new chemical drugs to specifically target mitoNEET in our future studies.
Conclusions and Future Directions
In summary, the results of this study further solidify the notion that functional PVAT contributes to maintenance of vasculature homeostasis while altered PVAT function promotes development of CVDs in humans and constitute a strong foundation to accelerate translation of the findings to preclinical settings. Even though pioglitazone is a PPARγ activator, it binds to mitoNEET. Therefore, targeting mitoNEET in PVAT might constitute a new therapeutic target for arterial stiffness and related CVDs. However, due to the limitations discussed above and wide distributions of adipose tissues in the body, new animal models in which we can manipulate genes only in the PVAT are necessary to distinguish the functions of PVAT and the roles of PVAT function in vascular homeostasis and CVDs development. The characteristic energy expenditure of brown or beige PVAT is a promising target to prevent or treat CVDs in the future, a vision that will be made more tangible as our knowledge regarding PVAT physiology and roles in CVD increases.