Introduction
Lower extremity peripheral arterial disease (LEAD) is increasing in prevalence in low-, middle-, and high-income countries with approximately 202 million people affected with LEAD worldwide [ , ]. Certain subgroups of individuals that are particularly at high risk for LEAD and major adverse limb events (MALE) include patients with diabetes and cigarette smokers [ , ]. There are four major risk factors for LEAD, smoking, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and diabetes [ ]. Diabetes and smoking are particularly high-risk populations with worse outcomes that are unrelated to other conventional risk factors [ ]. As compared with non-diabetes patients with LEAD, diabetes patients with LEAD have five to 15 times greater risk of below-the-knee disease amputations, four to five times higher likelihood of lower limb amputations, high rates of critical limb ischemia, and less effective and durable percutaneous and surgical revascularization.
Conventionally, the ankle-brachial index (ABI) is the recommended screening test for LEAD [ , ]. Clinicians suspicious of LEAD confirm the diagnosis by testing the ABI. An abnormal ABI has a low sensitivity for LEAD, but a high specificity in patients who report intermittent claudication. Even though the ABI is currently the standard test to detect LEAD, it has several limitations, particularly in patients with diabetes. These limitations include increased measurement variability with severity of LEAD, non-compressible calcified arteries that are present in 71% of patients with diabetes [ ], inability to detect arterial disease distal to the ankle precluding assessment of disease in the foot where many ulcers can occur, and underestimation of the extent of microvascular occlusive disease.
In this systematic review, we discuss methods used for the assessment of microvascular disease. Outcome measures with methods that measure microvascular flow are compared with the conventional measures of ABI and toe-brachial index (TBI).
Methods Used in the Assessment of Microvascular Disease of Lower Extremities
All articles reviewed are either case-control, prospective, or cross-sectional studies. The majority of the studies evaluated subjects who had LEAD, with and without diabetes.
Strain Gauge Plethysmography
Whitney first described a method using mercury-in-rubber resistance strain gauge to measure the volume changes in human limbs [ , ]. A decade later, Myers used SGP to measure muscle blood flow at the level of the calf and skin flow at the ankle in a study that included 49 patients with arteriographic evidence of LEAD, and 24 control subjects [ ]. Blood flow was measured at rest and during reactive hyperemia after a period of arterial occlusion. As compared with controls, the ranges of peak flow in LEAD patients were lower, which suggests this test is useful for the diagnosis of the disease. In 1965, Strandness and Bell developed a device to quantitate digit blood flow [ ]. In order to maintain sensitivity with repeated daily use, the rubber gauge was replaced with silastic. In a study of 427 patients, use of SGP gauge improved simplicity, sensitivity, and utility of SGP, which permits its routine use in the clinical evaluation of LEAD. Subsequently, many studies have used SGP to detect blood flow. These studies demonstrated that SGP can be used for detecting blood flow and measuring the blood pressure at the ankle and toe to calculate the ABI and TBI. These studies are reviewed in Table 1 . Table 1 Studies applied SGP for LEAD Author (year) Subject characteristics Method Results Dormandy (1973) [ ] • 126 patients with intermittent claudication: ○ Group 1: those who had been clinically improving during the previous 6 to 12 months, ○ Group 2: those whose condition had been more or less stationary, ○ Group 3: those who had been steadily deteriorating. • 100 normal subjects as control. • Calf blood flow: measured by SGP. Measurements at rest and after a standard stepping exercise protocol. • Arteriography: performed in 82 cases who were potential candidates for surgical treatment. • Blood viscosity (BV): carried out regularly on all patients and was measured at 2 shear rates, 23 and 230 s −1 . • Plasma fibrinogen, serum lipids and lipoproteins, and RBC malondialdehyde were also measured. • Resting blood flow was slightly less than the normal mean. • In terms of response to the standard exercise, 4 types of abnormal pattern were reported. • At both shear rates, BV was significantly higher in patients than in normal control. • 60% of patients had plasma fibrinogen concentration above the upper limit (400 mg/dL). • Positive correlation between BV (230 s −1 ) and the plasma fibrinogen ( r = 0 39; p < 0.01). Modesti (1987) [ ] • 38 lower extremities in 25 LEAD with T2DM patients: ○ Group I: 17 asymptomatic, ○ Group II: 6 intermittent claudication, ○ Group III: 6 rest pain, ○ Group IV: 9 gangrene. • 16 lower extremities in 10 healthy subjects served as controls. • All the examinations were carried out after lying supine for 20 min at 20 °C room. • Transcutaneous oxygen pressure (TcPO 2 ) was recorded on the upper chest and then on the dorsal of the foot. • Blood flow at rest and the hyperemia after 3 min of ischemia were measured with SGP. • Anterior and posterior tibial pressures were measured by the sphygmomanometric-Doppler technique to determine the ABI. • Regional perfusion index (RPI, the ratio of TcPO 2 at the foot and at the chest): no difference between group I and control, • Both TcPO 2 and RPI were able to differentiate the 4 groups patient groups. • TcPO 2 and RPI positively correlated both with the post-ischemic peak flow and post-ischemic peak flow/rest flow ratio. Killewich (2007) [ ] • 11 LEAD patients with claudication (mean ABI 0.62) • 9 healthy controls (mean ABI 1.1) • Measurement of leg blood flow by SGP • Measurement of baseline and amino acid-stimulated protein synthesis in leg muscle. • Protein synthesis was quantified from calf muscle biopsy. • Measurements of fractional synthetic rate (FSR) were repeated in all subjects after giving an oral drink of 15 g of essential amino acids. • Blood flow was reduced in the LEAD patients compared with controls. • FSR was equivalent between 2 groups in the baseline, and equivalent increases occurred in both groups in response to oral amino acid supplementation. Hoyer (2013) [ ] • 204 patients with knownor suspected LEAD • TBI was measured by automated portable device (APD) followed by the SGP. • TBI was measured by SGP followed by APD. • Patients were randomized in 4 blocks to determine which test would be used first. • According to the SGP test, 35 patients (17.2%) had an ABI > 0.90 but a TBI < 0.70. • Correlation analysis of the absolute toe pressures by the 2 methods showed an intra-class correlation coefficient of 0.937 (95% CI 0.887–0.962) for the right toe pressures and 0.939 (95% CI 0.908–0.958) for the left toe pressures. • APD had a good correlation in absolute toe pressures with SGP.
SGP assesses total blood flow of the limb that essentially results from muscular flow [ , ]. We describe four studies that used SGP for LEAD. Early studies used SGP to measure calf blood flow [ , , ]. Subsequently, this technique was used to measure toe pressure for calculation of TBI in one study [ ].
Blood Rheology
The study of blood viscosity in LEAD was reported more than 100 years ago [ ]. Cranley et al. reported that reductions in blood viscosity increase blood flow in the lower extremities and improve myocardial function [ ]. In a study that measured calf blood flow and systolic blood pressure in patients with hyperviscosity of the blood (compared with the calculated “normal” viscosity) [ ], there was an increase in flow resistance resulting in larger pressure reductions in patients with atherosclerotic arterial changes. Subsequently, many studies investigated blood rheology in LEAD patients (Table 2 ). Table 2 Studies incorporating blood rheology Subject characteristics Method Results and comparison Dormandy (1973) [ ] • 126 patients with intermittent claudication: ○ Group 1: those who had been clinically improving during the previous 6 to 12 months, ○ Group 2: those whose condition had been more or less stationary, ○ Group 3: those who had been steadily deteriorating. • 100 control subjects. • Calf blood flow: measured by SGP. Measurements at rest and after a standard stepping exercise protocol. • Arteriography: performed in 82 cases who were potential candidates for surgical treatment. • Blood viscosity (BV): carried out regularly on all patients and was measured at 2 shear rates, 23 and 230 s −1 . • Plasma fibrinogen, serum lipids and lipoproteins, and RBC malondialdehyde were also measured. • Resting blood flow was slightly less than the normal range mean, although the difference was not significant. • Much more meaningful was the pattern of response to the standard exercise, 4 types of abnormal pattern were reported. • At both shear rates, BV was significantly higher in patients than in normal control. • 60% of patients had a plasma fibrinogen concentration above the upper limit. • Significant positive correlation between BV (230 s −1 ) and the plasma fibrinogen ( r = 0 39; p < 0.01). Dormandy (1973) [ ] • 62 untreated patients with intermittent claudication ○ Group 1: those who had been clinically improving during the previous 6 to 12 months, ○ Group 2: those whose condition had been more or less stationary, ○ Group 3: those who had been steadily deteriorating. • Blood viscosity (BV): carried out regularly on all patients and was measured at 2 shear rates, 23 and 230 s −1 . • The susceptibility of the red blood cells to autoxidation was assessed by measuring the generation of malondialdehyde under standard oxidative stress. • Claudication distance increase in 26, remained unchanged in 21 and decreased in 14 patients. 18 patients complained of rest pain initially. The symptoms disappeared in 7 of these, while in 4 it appeared for the first time during the follow-up period. • Significant inverse correlation between the initial blood viscosity and subsequent progress. The correlation was higher when progress was assessed by a combination of criteria; and it was more significant when viscosity was measured at a higher than at a lower shear rate. Dormandy (1974) [ ] • Group of patients with symptoms intermittent claudication compared to controls. • Whole blood viscosity was measured at 4 shear rates. Viscosity was significantly higher ( p < 0.001) in patients than that of a normal age-matched control group. • The difference was greatest at the lowest shear rate. • The term “rheological claudication” was suggested to describe those patients with intermittent claudication who have an abnormally high blood viscosity. Ernst (1987) [ ] • Total 84 patients. 44 suffering from overt intermittent claudication and 40 healthy controls ○ Group 1: submitted to regular exercise, ○ Group 2: remained untreated • Exercise performed on treadmill at 3 km/h against angle of 13° twice per day, 5 times per week. • Blood rheology with use of following measurements in triplicate: ○ Native blood viscosity, ○ Plasma viscosity at 37 °C, ○ Hematocrit, ○ Blood cell filterability, ○ Red cell aggregation. • Baseline: no differences between groups I and II. Cross section between patients and matched controls showed blood and plasma viscosity, blood cell filterability, red cell aggregation differed significantly. • After 2-month training, these differences diminished and were no longer statistically significant. Lowe (1993) [ ] • 1592 subject were divided into 4 categories of peripheral artery disease: ○ Intermittent claudication (ABPI ≤ 0.9 or reactive hyperemia > 20%), ○ Major asymptomatic disease (ABPI ≤ 0.9 or reactive hyperemia > 20% or ABPI ≤ 0.7 or reactive hyperemia > 35%), ○ Minor asymptomatic disease (ABPI ≤ 0.9 or reactive hyperemia > 20%) ○ Normal. • Blood and plasma viscosity were measured at high shear rates (over 300 s −1 ) • Relative blood viscosity was calculated as a measure of red cell deformability. • Fibrinogen and uric acid were measured. • Blood viscosity in those with intermittent claudication decreased compared to those who are normal. (3.90 ± 0.1 vs. 3.53 ± 0.02 g/L). • Fibrinogen levels and uric acid levels increased in those with intermittent claudication compared to those who are normal (3.03 ± 0.11 vs. 2.65 ± 0.02 g/L and 331.5 ± 9.6 vs. 313 ± 2.3 g/L respectively). • Significant increase with age occurred with plasma viscosity ( p < 0.001) and leukocyte elastase ( p < 0.05). • High positive correlations present between many factors and also with cigarette consumption. • Highest correlations between hematocrit and blood viscosity ( r = 0.69), fibrinogen and plasma viscosity ( r = 0.46), and blood viscosity and plasma viscosity ( r = 0.45). • Relative blood viscosity unrelated to peripheral arterial disease ( p = 0.26). • Blood viscosity and fibrinogen remained significantly independently related to ABPI, not claudication. • Plasma viscosity related both claudication and ABPI. • Blood viscosity and fibrinogen significantly associated with ABPI on inclusion of other risk factors. • Association between fibrinogen and ABPI strongly related to amount of cigarette smoking, slope of graphs increasing at higher levels smoking. Gyawali [ ] • 100 participants ○ Group I: controls, ○ Group II: 1 or 2 positive components, ○ Group III: 3 or more positive components • Brachial blood pressure, toe-brachial pressure from great toe, and ankle pressure with hand-held Doppler. • Blood samples and collected within 1.5 h after collection to measure erythrocyte deformability, erythrocyte aggregation, whole blood viscosity (WBV), and lipid profile. • Mean WBV value increased from group I (3.99 ± 0.33 mPa s −1 ), group II (4.10 ± 0.50 mPa s −1 ), and group III (4.56 ± 0.36 mPa s −1 ). • ABPI was significantly correlated with WBV only ( p = 0.029). TBPI significantly correlated with WBV ( p < 0.0005) and erythrocyte aggregation parameters.
Six studies described above used blood rheology for diagnosis and symptom description of LEAD [ , , , , , ]. In a study of 126 subjects with intermittent claudication of varying severity, blood viscosity correlated with the severity of the LEAD. Dormandy used the low and high shear rates in different groups of subjects. At both shear rates, the measured blood viscosity was significantly higher than the measured blood viscosity in control subjects of the same age group [ ]. There was a significant inverse correlation between the baseline blood viscosity and pain free walking distance in the LEAD patients. These associations were stronger for high-shear blood viscosity than low-shear viscosity [ ]. In 120 patients with intermittent claudication, whole blood viscosity measured at four shear rates (from 230 to 0.77 s −1 ) was significantly higher than in an age-matched control group [ ]. Ernst reported that plasma viscosity, hematocrit, blood cell filterability, and red cell aggregation are associated with intermittent claudication and prognosis of LEAD [ ]. In a population-based cohort of 1592 participants enrolled in the Edinburgh Artery Study, blood and plasma viscosity were associated with lower limb ischemia [ ]. In a case-control study of 100 participants, ABI correlated with blood viscosity, whereas TBI was significantly correlated with both blood viscosity and erythrocyte deformability [ ].
Skin Oxygen Tension and Skin Perfusion Pressure
Skin oxygen tension and skin perfusion pressure have been used to assess the severity of microvascular disease, and predict healing rates of ischemic ulcers. In the early 1970s, Huch published the first report using continuous transcutaneous oxygen tension (TcPO 2 ) measurement in the assessment of peripheral vascular insufficiency [ ]. Several larger studies are summarized in Table 3 . Table 3 Studies investigating skin oxygen tension and skin perfusion pressure Author (year) Subject characteristics Method Results Karanfilian (1986) [ ] • 59 limbs in 48 males. 37 of limbs (63%) are diabetics whereas 22 of limbs (37%) are non-diabetics • 20 transmetatarsal or digital amputations were performed, whereas the remainder of the lesions were debrided and allowed to heal by secondary intention or were covered by split-thickness skin grafts. • Systolic Doppler ankle pressure was obtained in all patients and ankle/arm index was calculated. • Laser Doppler (LD) was used to measure skin blood flow velocity from the plantar aspect of great toe or plantar aspect of foot overlying first metatarsal head. • TcPO 2 measured in millimeters of mercury from dorsal foot midway between ankle and toes. • Of the 59 ischemic limbs, 32 ultimately healed (54%) and 27 (46%) failed to heal. 16 of 37 (46%) limbs in diabetic patients healed, 15 of 22 (68%) limbs in non-diabetic patients eventually healed. • TcPO 2 , LDSBFV, and LD-PWA values significantly greater in limbs ultimately healed. • No significant difference in Doppler ankle pressure or ankle/arm indices. • TcPO 2 95% accuracy, sensitivity of 100%, and specificity 88%. LD specificity of 96%, sensitivity 79%. Doppler ankle pressure sensitivity 75%, specificity significantly less. Specificity and accuracy Doppler ankle pressures significantly decreased diabetic patients. Fairs (1987) [ ] • 25 patients undergoing lower limb amputation ○ 14 patients undergoing had the amputation below the knee ○ 11 patients undergoing had the amputation above the knee • 5 healthy controls • TcPO 2 measurement were made when the temporal variations in measured level were within 0.1 kPa • LDF was tested with subject in semi-recumbent position after allowing at least 15 min for them to equilibrate. • Sites on medial aspect of both legs, 13 cm from knee joint line, and 5 cm from tibia used for both instruments. Measurement at lateral site, 13 cm from knee joint, and 3 cm from tibia also made with LDF. • LDF and TcPO 2 made sequentially on identical sites. • Significant differences exist between TcPO 2 measurements of each group (This would be expected since the amputation level was largely determined on the basis of this measurement). • Baseline LDF flux values controls, BK, and AK patients were not significantly different. • Significant difference existed between heated flux of control and both BK and AK groups. • Difference between heated flux both amputee groups also significant. • Larger difference between BK (6.0 ± 1.5 kPa) and AK (1.5 ± 0.6 kPa) group found with relative increase in flux ( p < 0.001). • Difference between controls and BK or AK groups using parameter also significant. • Correlation between TcPO 2 and relative increase LDF flux ( r = 0.7, p < 0.001). Gebuhr (1989) [ ] • 24 patients suffering from atherosclerosis which had led to gangrene or rest pain of part of the foot • 9 of them are diabetic • Microcirculation of skin measured using LDF. • Each patient had recordings at 4 levels: ○ Dorsum of foot, ○ 10 cm below knee, ○ 10 cm above patella, ○ Sternum. • After LD recordings were completed, segmental systolic blood pressure (SSP) and skin perfusion pressure (SPP) were measured. • Laser Doppler flowmetry was sensitive to alterations in blood flow or any external disturbance during its use. • Sternal recordings always showed higher basic flow than those of leg and greatest increase flow after local heating. • Increase in of 5 or more arbitrary units regarded as evidence of vasodilatation. Increase in flow after heating directly related to healing. • 4 cases had positive local heating tests at all levels and had small necrotic areas on 1 or 2 toes. • 13 patients had negative local heat test on dorsum foot, but positive at higher levels. 3 patients had positive local heat tests only at thigh level and above-knee amputations performed. • Levels estimated by LDF compared with actual amputation levels as decided on results of SSP and SPP tests, high degree correlation found. Positive local heat test indicates presence reserve capacity in microcirculation needed to ensure healing. Mayrovitz (1996) [ ] • 120 subjects. ○ 60 with diabetes (40 insulin dependent) ○ 60 free diabetes • 36 of DM patients had peripheral neuropathy, 24 had no detectible symptoms or signs of neuropathy. • 35 DM subjects and 24 non-DM subjects judged not to have LEAD. • Cardiovascular parameters: vital signs, magnetic resonance flowmetry, and cardiac stroke volume assessments • Leg blood flow measurement for macrocirculation: magnetic resonance flowmetry • Microvascular evaluation: ○ TcPO 2 at standardized site on foot dorsum measured using probe temperature setting 45 °C. ○ Dorsum site adjacent to TcPO 2 probe, skin microvascular blood perfusion measured using laser Doppler flow. ○ Skin temperature of dorsum measured at 3 standardized sites prior thermal heating and average used to characterize dorsum skin temperature. • Systemic parameters: There were significant differences in heart rate, stroke volume, systolic and mean BP, although no significant difference in cardiac output and cardiac index between DM and NODM. • Leg macrovascular parameters: There were no significant differences in ABI and leg blood perfusion between DM and NODM. However, ASI was lower in DM subjects. • Microvascular parameters: • Each DM parameter value significantly lower: TcPO 2 (51.9 ± 1.4 vs. 62.9 ± 1.3 mmHg). ○ Baseline resting laser Doppler perfusion levels (a.u units) significantly higher DM subjects at dorsum (4.6 ± 0.2 vs. 3.7 ± 0.2). ○ Perfusion values at 45 °C significantly less at dorsum (24.5 ± 1.2 vs. 30.0 ± 2.0). ○ Significant correlation found for DM subjects ( r 2 = 0.48) remained even when jointly controlling both subject age and leg arterial status ( r 2 = 0.46). ○ Corresponding correlation in non-DM subjects not significant ( r 2 = 0.11). ○ TcPO 2 levels for DM subjects compared with non-DM significantly reduced (55.7 ± 1.6 vs. 62.2 ± 1.7 mmHg). • No significant impact of neuropathy on any macro- or microparameter detected. • Subjects with LEAD shown to have significantly reduced ABI and leg perfusion values compared to subjects free LEPAD. • Only in DM subjects that superimposed LEAD results in TcPO 2 level significantly less than subjects free LEAD (non-DM without and with LEAD: 64.0 vs. 59.4 mmHg and DM without and with LEAD: 1.08. vs. 0.75 a.u.). Astronuovo, (1997) [ ] • 53 patients with total of 61 limbs with non-healing foot ulcer. ○ Group I: arterial reconstruction or major amputation. ○ Group II: wound debridement, minor amputation or both. • Measure the SPP by using laser Doppler scanner. Laser Doppler skin perfusion pressure transducer consisted laser Doppler probe secured within bladder of blood pressure cuff, contained transparent polyvinylchloride window, microcirculatory perfusion measurements made. Pressure first occurs (reinitiation of microcirculatory skin flow) considered SPP. • SPP measurements repeated twice, lower value taken as SPP and compared with clinical decision regarding management. • No difference in prevalence of diabetes between group I and group II patients. • No difference in location of foot ulcers between groups. • No difference in size of foot ulcers between groups. • No significance in ABI between groups. ABI could not be calculated in 17 limbs because of incompressible arteries (28%) limbs. • SPP values patients group I lower than 30 mmHg in all but 1 patient selected vascular reconstruction or major amputation. • Specificity of SPP test 73% in group II patients. • Positive predictive value of SPP test 75%. • ABI had far too many false-negative tests to be useful either selection of therapy or prediction of healing. • SPP values between 20 and 30 mmHg do not predict healing with great accuracy. • SPP value less than 20 mmHg and SPP value greater than 30 mmHg predict outcome of local therapy quite accurately.
We summarize five studies that used skin oxygen tension and skin perfusion pressure for LEAD. Karanfilian reported that TcPO 2 can be used to evaluate skin blood flow, predict wound healing, and determine the level of amputation [ ]. Fairs reported that TcPO2 demands meticulous and time-consuming attention to detail and system recalibration even when moving the instrument between two patients on the same ward [ ]. Gebhur also reported that LDF had high correlation with skin perfusion pressure and segmental systolic blood pressure tests in estimating the amputation level [ ]. Mayrovitz reported that they measured TcPO 2 in patients with or without diabetes; their findings suggested a primary linkage between the diabetic TcPO 2 deficit and the microcirculatory submaximal vasodilatory response [ ]. Castronuovo used skin perfusion pressure (SPP) to diagnose critical limb ischemia. This method has an 80% accuracy [ ].
Laser Doppler Flowmetry and Photoplethysmography
LDF and photoplethysomgraphy are more recent tools used in the non-invasive measurement for patients with LEAD. Cutaneous flow was measured as the difference in millivolts between the recorded value and zero-flow signal generated by laser Doppler. Measurements in more severely and less severely affected limbs of each patient were highly reproducible with an accuracy of 99% [ ]. The use of a vasodilator, intra-arterial administration of nafeidrofuryl (INN), in 20 limbs achieved a statistically significant improvement in latency time between the end of occlusion and resumption of cutaneous flow and the time lapse to recover rest flow. Subsequently, other studies have been published using LDF in LEAD patients. These studies are reviewed in Table 4 . Table 4 Studies with laser Doppler flowmetry on LEAD Author (year) Subject characteristics Method Results deGraaf, (2000) [ ] • 60 patients (mean age 66 years) with LEAD ○ 37 men ○ 23 women • Toe pressures simultaneously measured with PPG and 2 LD methods, LD 3 and LD 0.03 . • Ankle systolic pressures measured in dorsal pedal and posterior tibial arteries at level of ankle. Highest pressure considered to represent highest perfusion pressure. • ABI calculated by dividing ankle pressures by highest of left and right brachial pressure and expressed as percentage. • 1 signal measurement of toe blood pressure performed and measurements repeated after 1 week to establish 1-week intra-observer reproducibility. • With a very low pressure ( n = 19), pressure could not be measured with PPG because no pulsatile signal could be detected whereas all toe pressures could be measured with LD 3 (mean 24 ± 14 mmHg) and 17 with LD 0.03 (mean 21 ± 12 mmHg). • Intra-class correlation coefficients (ICCs) between PPG and LD 3 and LD 0.03 were 0.95 or more. • The ICCs of the 1-week reproducibility of the PPG, LD 3 and Ld 0.03 pressure were 0.92, 0.88, and 0.86. • The variation was equally distributed across the range of pressures in all 3 methods Hoyer (2013) [ ] • 200 consecutive patients referred for distal blood pressure measurements • Toe and ankle pressures were assessed by both LDF and mercury-in-silastic strain gauge plethysmography. • Measurements made at least twice with maximum 5 measurements until 2 readings obtained with maximum of 10 mmHg difference. • Brachial blood pressures measured supine position with side with highest systolic pressure selected as reference for calculation of ABI and TBI. • The LDF method had higher mean toe pressure than SGP method, 5.8 mmHg for the right limb and 7.0 mmHg for the left limb. • No significant differences in the mean ankle pressure between these 2 methods. • Intra-class correlation between LDF and strain gauge plethysmography showed excellent correlation for both intra- and inter-observer data (≥ 0.947). Lal (2015) [ ] • 6 T2DM without neuropathy • 6 controls • Blood perfusion was measured by LDF • Region is among regions in foot sole, prone to develop ulcer with more predominant changes in flow dynamics due exerted walking pressure. Region of interest confirmed free from callus formation. • Measurements taken with subjects in supine position with foot allowed in resting position throughout measurement. LDF signals recorded 20-min duration at sampling rate 1 kHz using experimental set-up from plantar area. Signals of 5 min duration considered study involving fractal analysis. Hurst coefficient (H) indicates whether signal has persistent or anti-persistent behavior. H > 0.5 indicates persistent signal implying increments of series correlated. H < 0.5 indicates increments of signal anti-correlated. • H was lower in diabetes patients compared to healthy controls. ○ Diabetic group, H = 0.7 ± 0.0379 (mean ± SE) ○ Healthy group, H = 0.810 ± 0.0044 (mean ± SE) • H indicates strength of correlation between successive elements in LDF time series. • Endothelial dysfunction associated with diabetes characterized by impaired regulation of vasodilation due decreased production NO. • Relative energy (mean ± SD) in healthy control subjects was 0.1382 ± 0.0181 vs. 0.2444 ± 0.049 in the diabetes group. • Observed increase in relative energy found to be statistically significant ( p = 0.0635) and expected due to effects endothelial dysfunction. Hodges (2015) [ ] • 5 patients with unilateral symptomatic LEPAD • 10 age-matched healthy controls • Resting ABI was measured and calculated according to an internationally agreed protocol • Blood pressure in the bilateral brachial, dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries were determined by a handheld Doppler probe. • Index of skin blood flow was measured by LDF. • Resting ABI was lower in LEAD group (0.55 ± 0.07 a.u. in moderate LEAD vs. 1.17 ± 0.07 a.u. in normal control) • Resting ABI for the non-diseased limb of individuals with LEAD was 1.03 ± 0.04 a.u. • Baseline LDF at the untreated skin sites did not differ among limbs under thermoneutral conditions. • Initial peak LDF at untreated skin sites was lower in diseased limb of LEAD participants compared with healthy control limbs (46.1 ± 3.4% max vs. 59.9 ± 10.9% max, p < 0.01) • LDF was lower when compared with the non-diseased contralateral limbs (46.1 ± 3.4% max vs. 58.4 ± 9.2% max, p < 0.05) • Plateau LDF was reduced ( P < 0.05) in the diseased limb of the LEAD patients compared with the non-diseased contralateral limb. • Responses at the untreated skin sites were lower in the diseased limb of LEAD compared with healthy control limbs.
We summarize four studies that used LDF in the assessment of LEAD. In a study of 60 patients with LEAD, LDF was used as an alternative to photoplethysmography for measurement of toe pressure, which is a relevant measure for critical ischemia [ ]. Hoyer compared the diagnostic accuracy of laser Doppler flowmetry and strain gauge plethysmography for segmental pressure measurement. LDF was highly correlated with SGP over a range of toe and ankle pressure [ ]. In a study of diabetic patients and healthy controls, LDF was used for screening of microcirculatory changes and a non-invasive tool for LEAD assessment [ ]. In another study of LEAD patients, the LDF plateau was reduced in the diseased limb of LEAD patients compared with the non-diseased limb and healthy control limb. However, the authors cited a limitation that LDF in an older population may be impaired due to reduced blood cell flow to subcutaneous tissues [ ].
Discussion
LEAD is an atherosclerotic occlusive disease of the lower extremities that may result in major adverse limb events (MALE) and is a marker for increased risk of clinical atherothrombotic events affecting the cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and renovascular beds. LEAD patients have an increased risk of MI, stroke, death, and the condition causes significant long-term disability in diabetic patients. LEAD affects 12 million people in the USA with the most common symptom being claudication (cramping, pain or aching in calves, thighs, or buttocks with exertion and relief with rest).
The main current diagnostic approaches for the diagnosis of LEAD are symptoms of intermittent claudication and reduced ankle-brachial index (ABI). However, symptoms of intermittent claudication may be minimized by reduced activity resulting from being overweight, peripheral neuropathy, and co-morbidities that reduce functional capacity such as ischemic heart disease and congestive heart failure. Meanwhile, various disease processes mimic claudication symptoms and have to be distinguished before the diagnosis of LEAD can be made. In addition, it has been shown that an abnormal ABI has a low sensitivity, but a high specificity in those with intermittent claudication. Limitations of the ABI include inability to detect occlusive disease distal to the ankle, lack of sensitivity to patient’s height, and arterial stiffness. Another common mistake when taking an ABI involves failure to measure the brachial pressure in both arms, and the presence of subclavian artery stenosis. Due to these reasons, alternative methods that can be used for early detection of LEAD and the risk of MALE are needed. The microcirculation plays a critical role in the regulation of metabolic, hemodynamic, and thermal state of the lower extremity. Inadequate microcirculation decreases blood supply causing the accumulation of the acidic metabolites in the lower extremities. We have reviewed different methods to detect the microcirculation (see above). Strain gauge plethysmography (SGP) is based on detection of volume change and was introduced in the 1960s. It is still considered the method of reference in many vascular laboratories in northern Europe, due to the ample validation against intra-arterial pressure and angiographic findings. Although the results of SPG have a good correlation with the results of laser Doppler flowmetry, the system has to be well validated and the instantaneous inflation of the occlusion cuff used by the SGP may cause discomfort, especially in the patients with lower extremity ulcers [ ]. Blood viscosity plays a very important role in the blood supply for the LEAD patient; however, it has less value in the primary diagnosis of LEAD [ ]. The TcPO2 is a non-invasive method reflecting local arterial skin blood flow and oxygenation and can be used as a means of determining severity and clinical progression of PAD. However, most studies found inter/intraobserver errors for TcPO 2 of up to 20% [ ]. Hemodialysis will also affect the result of TcPO 2 [ ]. Laser Doppler flowmetry is an effective non-invasive method used to detect the subclinical impairment in microcirculation. This approach allows for diagnose of LEAD in the early stages of the disease process that may result in treatment that potentially reduces MALE. Several advantages of current laser Doppler flowmeters include ease of use, assessment of tissue perfusion, and augmentation of the vasodilatation after temperature stimulus. This method may also be useful in the assessment of pharmacological therapies designed to improve microvascular flow in patients with LEAD.
Future studies with flowmetry are required to determine rates of progression to MALE in larger patient cohorts followed for several years. Moreover, clinical trials are needed to determine whether interventions that improve blood viscosity and microvascular perfusion alter rates of MALE.