Introduction
Heart failure is a major cause of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, with the global prevalence predicted to increase significantly over the next few decades [ ]. Cardiac remodeling is recognized as a central process in the development of heart failure, while cardiomyocyte hypertrophy is commonly present in earlier stages [ ]. Hypertrophic signals result in increased protein synthesis and regulate the cell cycle [ ]. The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is a key pathway of cellular processes and regulates many proteins that are involved in cell cycle progression, signal transduction, and apoptosis [ ]. The proteasome is composed of two complexes of proteins: the proteolytic core (20S proteasome), containing 28 subunits, and one or two regulatory complexes (known as 19S regulatory complexes), also called proteasome activators. The 20S core proteasomal complex has three peptidase activities, chymotrypsin-like, trypsin-like, and caspase-like activities, which are linked to the β5, β2, and β1 subunits, respectively. The association of the 20S core proteasomal complex with 19S regulatory and/or 11S activator complexes forms a macromolecular structure known as the 26S proteasome. The proteolytic process of the proteasome occurs in two distinct steps: denaturation in the regulatory complex (19S) and degradation in the proteolytic core (20S) [ ]. Indeed, proteasome inhibitors alter protein expression of cardiomyocytes and regulate the progression of cardiovascular diseases [ ]. A previous study showed that MG132, a proteasome inhibitor, significantly suppressed isoproterenol-induced cardiac hypertrophy in cultured cardiomyocytes [ ]. Another proteasome inhibitor, epoxomicin, has also been reported to improve cardiac function in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mice [ ].
Our previous study of the brain found that glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) activity was significantly increased after treatment with the proteasome inhibitor lactacystin for 24, 48, and 72 h in rats [ ]. We also demonstrated that proteasome inhibition significantly enhanced GSK-3 by reducing phosphorylation of the Ser 9 site of GSK-3. It has been reported that GSK-3β has a powerful antihypertrophic effect [ ]. AMPKα is associated with energy metabolism, and its activation can attenuate cardiac hypertrophy [ ] and modulate GSK-3 activity [ ]. Quercetin is a naturally occurring flavonol with extensive biological effects, including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiatherosclerotic, antihypertensive, and anticancer properties. In addition, quercetin plays an important role in the prevention of cardiovascular diseases [ ]. In recent years, several studies have reported that quercetin prevents cardiac hypertrophy in cells, rats, and transgenic mice [ , , ]. However, the molecular mechanisms by which quercetin exerts its cardioprotective effects remain largely unknown. Quercetin has proteasome-inhibitory activity and reduces the chymotrypsin-like, trypsin-like, and post-glutamyl peptide hydrolase activities of the 20S proteasome in RAW 264.7 whole cells [ ].
Therefore, the present study tests the hypothesis that quercetin, a natural flavonol drug, improves cardiac hypertrophy by a new mechanism related to proteasome inhibition, which is dependent on activation of GSK-3 in adult rats and primary neonatal cardiomyocytes.
Methods
Reagents and Antibodies
Quercetin, dimethyl sulfoxide, and angiotensin II were all purchased from Sigma Chemical (St. Louis, MO, USA). LiCl was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA). The synthetic fluorogenic proteasome substrates Suc-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-AMC (chymotrypsin-like) were from Enzo Life Sciences, Inc. (Farmingdale, NY, USA), and Boc-Leu-Arg-Arg-AMC (trypsin-like) and Z-Leu-Leu-Glu-AMC (peptidylglutamyl peptide-hydrolyzing activity) were from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN, USA). The primary antibodies used in this study are listed in Table 1 . Peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse and anti-rabbit IgG were obtained from Jackson Immuno Research Laboratories (West Grove, PA, USA). The enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) kit was from Pierce (Rockford, IL, USA). The ABC staining system was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Table 1 Primary antibodies used in this study Antibody Specificity Type Dilution Source Ubiquitin (P4D1) Ubiquitin, polyubiquitin, and ubiquitinated proteins mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling GSK-3α/β Total-GSK-3α/β mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling GSK-3α-Ser21 Phosphorylated GSK-3α mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling GSK-3β-Ser9 Phosphorylated GSK-3β mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling AKT Total-AKT pAb 1:2000 for WB Cell Signaling AKT-Ser473 Phosphorylated AKT mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling AMPKα Total-AMPKα mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling AMPKα-Thr172 Phosphorylated AMPKα mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling β-Catenin Total-β-catenin mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling β-Catenin-Ser33/37 Phosphorylated β-catenin pAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling Histone H3 Total histone H3 mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling Histone H3-Ser10 Phosphorylated histone H3 pAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling GATA4 GATA4 mAb 1:1000 for WB 1:200 for IF EPITOMICS LKB1 LKB1 mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling LKB1-Ser428 Phosphorylated LKB1 mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling ERK ERK mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling ERK1/2-Thr202/204 Phosphorylated ERK1/2 mAb 1:1000 for WB Cell Signaling PSMC6 Rpt4 pAb 1:1000 for WB Proteintech PSMC2 Rpt1 pAb 1:1000 for WB Proteintech PSMB1 Proteasome subunit beta type 1 pAb 1:1000 for WB Proteintech PSMB2 Proteasome subunit beta type 2 mAb 1:1000 for WB Abcam PSMB5 Proteasome subunit beta type 5 pAb 1:1000 for WB Abcam WB Western blotting, IF immunofluorescence, mAb monoclonal antibody, pAb polyclonal antibody
Experimental Animals and Animal Treatments
Neonatal (1–2 days old) and adult-specific pathogen-free Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (100–120 g) were purchased from the Guangdong Medical Laboratory Animal Center. Adult SD male rats were housed with a 12/12-h light/dark cycle and had ad libitum access to food and water. Treatment of the rats was in accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health (USA). The animal use protocol was approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments of Guangzhou Medical University under approval reference number SCXK 2013-0002.
Rats were randomized into five groups ( n = 10 per group): (i) sham-operated group (Sham), (ii) abdominal aortic constriction group (AAC), (iii) AAC plus Que (5 mg/kg/day) (A + Q5) group, (iv) AAC plus Que (10 mg/kg/day) (A + Q10) group, and (v) AAC plus Que (20 mg/kg/day) (A + Q20) group. The drug quercetin was dissolved in 1% methylcellulose (Sigma, USA) [ ]. At day 2 after AAC surgery, rats in the sham and AAC groups were administered 1% methylcellulose intragastrically, while rats in the other three groups were treated with different doses of quercetin in 1% methylcellulose for 8 weeks.
Induction of Abdominal Aortic Constriction
Rats (100–120 g) were anesthetized by an intraperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg). After the abdomen was opened, rats were subjected to abdominal aortic constriction as previously described [ , ]. Sham-operated animals contained an untied abdominal aorta (the suture material was in place, but the ligature was not tightened). All rats were housed in constant temperature facilities, exposed to a 12-h light–12-h dark cycle, and given standard lab chow and water.
Echocardiography
After 8 weeks of AAC with quercetin treatment or not, the chest hairs of rats were removed with a topical depilatory agent under inhaled isoflurane (1%) for anesthesia. Transthoracic echocardiography was performed with a VisualSonics (Vevo 2100; VisualSonics, Inc., Toronto, Ontario, Canada) equipped with a 25 MHz imaging transducer as described previously [ , ]. Rats ( n = 10 per group) were kept anesthetized with 2% isoflurane gas at an inflow rate of 0.5–1.5 ml/min during the echocardiographic examination. The left ventricle (LV) was analyzed via the parasternal long- and short-axis views, with Doppler images for LV systolic function, LV cavity diameter, wall thickness, diastolic function, and LV end-systolic and end-diastolic volume determination. The passive LV filling peak velocity, MV E (cm/s); atrial contraction flow peak velocity, MV A (cm/s); ratio of E-wave velocity to A-wave velocity; and MV E/A were acquired from images of the mitral valve Doppler flow with tilted parasternal long-axis views. Throughout the procedure, ECG, respiratory rate (RR), and heart rate (HR) were monitored. An increased rate (RR and HR) was a sign that anesthesia was too light, whereas a decreased or irregular rate (RR and HR) was indicative of anesthesia that was too deep. The isoflurane gas volume was therefore regulated according to the rate to ensure an adequate depth of anesthesia.
Histological Examination and Heart Tissue Extraction
After detection by echocardiography, hearts were quickly removed, rinsed with saline, and photographed. The weight of the (LV), including the septum, and body weight ( n = 10) were measured. Then, the hearts (left ventricle) of some rats ( n = 3) were cut into three transverse blocks parallel to the atrioventricular groove. The transverse sections of the left ventricles were fixed with 10% neutral-buffered formalin at room temperature for no more than 24 h and transferred into 70% alcohol for storage. Later, they were embedded in paraffin, cut into 5-μm sections, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and Masson’s trichrome for histological examination. Slides were examined and photographed from three areas of the three stained sections under a light microscope (Leica, Germany). Images were processed by an operator who was blinded to the treatment groups using Image Pro-Plus or Adobe Photoshop image analysis software. As for the other heart tissue extraction ( n = 7), every heart was cut into three pieces and stored in different microfuge tubes at − 80 °C.
Western Blotting Analysis
Primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes (NRCMs) from neonatal rats or frozen tissues were initially homogenized in lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, USA) with the protease inhibitor PMSF and subsequently sonicated on ice. The tissue lysates were then boiled for 5 min, followed by centrifugation at 12,000 ×g for 10 min. The supernatants were collected, and the protein content was analyzed using a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, USA). Nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins were extracted with a Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Kit (Keygentec, Jiangsu, China). Equal amounts of protein (30 μg), cytoplasm, or nuclei were separated on SDS-polyacrylamide gels (10%) and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Roche, Switzerland), followed by incubation with a primary antibody (see Table 1 ), washing, and incubation with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies. The protein-antibody complex was visualized by the Pierce ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Thermo Scientific) and exposed to Kodak medical X-ray film (Kodak, USA). The specific molecular band intensity was determined by Quantity One software from Bio-Rad. Each blot was exposed for three to four different periods of time, and only those with adequate exposure were used for quantification.
Primary Culture of Neonatal Rat Cardiomyocytes
Neonatal SD rats (1–2 days old) were exposed to hypothermia until they became unresponsive and were then euthanized by cervical dislocation. Their hearts were rapidly excised, and the ventricles were dissected. NRCMs were isolated as previously described [ ]. NRCMs were seeded at a density of 5 × 10 6 cells/ml in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS (fetal bovine serum) and 0.1 mM bromodeoxyuridine. After 24 h, NRCMs were subjected to various treatments as described below.
Cardiomyocytes were randomized into six groups: (i) control (Con), (ii) angiotensin II 1 μM (Ang II), (iii) angiotensin II 1 μM + quercetin 10 μM (Ang II + Q10), (iv) angiotensin II 1 μM + quercetin 20 μM (Ang II + Q20), (v) angiotensin II 1 μM + quercetin 40 μM (Ang II + Q40), and (vi) 0.1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). After a 48-h treatment, cells were harvested for analysis. Angiotensin II and quercetin were dissolved in ddH 2 O and 0.1% dimethyl sulfoxide, respectively.
Assay of Proteasome Activity
Proteasome activity was measured as previously reported [ ]. NRCs or frozen tissues were initially homogenized in lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, USA) and subsequently sonicated on ice. Tissue lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 ×g for 10 min. The supernatants were collected, and the protein content was analyzed using a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, USA). Equal amounts of protein (20 μg/20 μl) were used for analysis of proteasome activity. Cell lysates were incubated with a fluorogenic substrate, including Boc-Leu-Arg-Arg-AMC, Suc-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-AMC, and Z-Leu-Leu-Glu-AMC. The fluorescence intensity (345-nm excitation, 445-nm emission) was measured using a Spectra Max® M3 Microplate Reader (Molecular Device, USA). The activity of the proteasome was expressed by subtracting the background value, which was determined by incubating the reaction mixture with 50 μM of lactacystin (specific inhibitor of proteasome) for 30 min before addition of proteasome substrate. Proteasome activity was determined as an increase in fluorescence of the reaction products.
Cell Surface Area Measurement
The cell surface area was measured as described previously [ ]. Briefly, NRCMs were plated onto slides, cultured for 24 h, and subjected to compound treatment. After that, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 10 min, followed by a 20-min rest in PBS containing 1% Triton X-100. After blocking with 10% normal goat serum for 1 h, the slides were incubated with 50 μg/ml phalloidin-tetramethyl-rhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC, Sigma, USA) at room temperature for 40 min to stain actin fibers. Cell nuclei were counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Sigma Chemical). After washing in PBS three times, the slides were examined under a laser scanning confocal microscope (A1si, Nikon, Japan).
Real-Time RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. cDNA was synthesized from 1 μg of RNA with a PrimeScript RT reagent kit with gDNA Eraser (Takara). Real-time PCR amplification reactions were performed using a SYBR Premix Ex Taq kit with ROX (Takara) in triplicate using the ABI Prism 7900 Real-Time PCR system. Gene expression was measured by the ΔΔCT method and normalized to the GAPDH mRNA levels. The data are presented as the fold change in the expression of the gene of interest relative to the control groups. The primer sequences (Life Technologies) used were as follows: ANF forward, 5-CTTCGGGGGTAGGATTGAC-3 and reverse 5-CTTGGGATCTTTTGCGATCT-3; GAPDH forward 5-GCTGATGCCCCCATGTTTG-3 and reverse 5-ACCAGTGGATGCAGGGATG-3.
Immunofluorescence
Fluorescent staining of primary cardiomyocytes was conducted on collagen-coated 25-mm glass coverslips at a density of 2.7 × 10 5 cells per coverslip. Cells were starved for 12 h in a serum-free medium before being treated with Ang II (1 μM, Sigma) and Que (20 μM, Sigma) for 48 h. Briefly, after washing twice with cold PBS, cells were fixed with 4% ( w / v ) paraformaldehyde (PFA) at room temperature for 30 min and were washed with PBS containing 2% BSA and 0.1% Triton X-100. Cardiomyocyte specificity was verified by staining with GATA4 overnight at 4 °C. After washing in PBS for three times, the slides were incubated with Alexa 488-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG (1:500, Invitrogen) plus DAPI in TBS containing 5% goat serum and 0.1% Triton at room temperature for 1 h. Immunostaining was analyzed by a laser scanning confocal microscope.
Statistical Analysis
All data were analyzed using the statistical software GraphPad Prism 6.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA). All data are expressed as the means ± standard error of the mean (SEM). One-way ANOVA was performed to determine the significance between groups. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Quercetin Improved Cardiac Hypertrophy and Cardiac Diastolic Function in AAC Rats by Echocardiography
Briefly, rats were divided into sham and AAC groups, and normal saline or different doses of quercetin (5, 10, 20 mg/kg/day) were orally administered for 8 weeks starting at day 2 after the sham or AAC operation. To confirm the success of the AAC, the constriction extent of the abdominal aortas was evaluated by transthoracic echocardiography 2–3 days after the operation. The abdominal aortas of rats in the AAC groups were obviously constricted compared to those of rats in the sham (Fig. 1 a). The M-mode (Fig. 1 b, left panel) and transmitral filling pattern (Fig. 1 b, right panel) of echocardiography were used to evaluate the cardiac function at 8 weeks after quercetin administration. There was no significant difference in heart rate (HR) (Fig. 1 c). The left ventricular anterior wall (LVAW, d and LVAW, s) (Fig. 1 d) and left ventricular posterior wall (LVPW, d and LVPW, s) (Fig. 1 e) were increased, and LV end diastolic dimension (LVIDs) was decreased (Fig. 1 f) 8 weeks after AAC, in which changes were markedly prevented by different doses of quercetin. However, compared to the sham group, the left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) and rate of fractional shortening (FS) were increased in the AAC group (by 16.5 and 32.2%, respectively). On the other hand, MV E and the ratio of the E- to A-waves (E/A) were significantly decreased by 31.1% in the AAC group, in which changes were prevented by treatment with quercetin (Fig. 1 g, h). The IVRT (isovolumetric relaxation time) was also correspondingly increased in the AAC group, in which increase was prevented by quercetin treatment at 10 and 20 mg/kg/day (Fig. 1 i). In addition, quercetin treatment decreased the EF and FS significantly compared to the AAC-treated group (Fig. 1 j). These results suggest that quercetin mitigated left ventricular hypertrophy and improved cardiac diastolic function. Fig. 1 Effect of quercetin on cardiac function by echocardiography. a Representative transmitral Doppler flow of the abdominal aorta in the Sham and AAC groups at 2–3 days after surgery. b Representative M-mode images (left panel) and the transmitral filling pattern (right panel) of echocardiography in the sham (vehicle), AAC (vehicle), A + Q 5 (AAC + Q 5 mg/kg/day), A + Q 10 (AAC + Q 10 mg/kg/day), and A + Q 20 (AAC + Q 20 mg/kg/day) groups. c – j Quantitative analysis of HR, LVAW, s, LVAW, d, LVPW, s, LVPW, d, LVID, s, MV E, MV A, MV E/A, IVRT, EF%, and FS% in the five groups at 8 weeks after treatment with quercetin or vehicle ( n = 10). Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA as the means ± SEM. * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01 vs. Sham; † P < 0.05; †† P < 0.01 vs. AAC. AAC (A) abdominal aorta constriction, Q quercetin, EF ejection fraction, FS fractional shortening, LVAW, s the left ventricular end-systolic anterior wall thickness, LVAW, d the left ventricular end-diastolic anterior wall thickness, LVPW, s the left ventricular end-systolic posterior wall thickness, LVPW, d the left ventricular end-diastolic posterior wall thickness, MV A A-wave velocity, MV E E-wave velocity, MV E/A the ratio of E-wave velocity to A-wave velocity, LVID, s the left ventricular end-systolic internal dimension, IVRT isovolumetric relaxation time
Quercetin Decreased Cardiac Hypertrophy and Excessive Collagen Deposition
The HW/BW ratio markedly increased in rats with a pressure overload by 40.8%, which was prevented by treatment with quercetin (Fig. 2 a, c). However, there was no obvious difference in body weight among the groups (Fig. 2 b). Compared to the sham group, cardiac muscle fibers were enlarged in the AAC group, as shown by HE staining, and quercetin prevented the increase in size of cardiomyocytes (Fig. 2 d, upper panel). In addition, Masson’s trichrome staining was used to assess the effect of quercetin on cardiac fibrosis. Compared to the sham group, the connective tissue fibers proliferated, muscle striates were disordered, and volume of cardiomyocytes was increased in the AAC group. Quercetin administration dramatically attenuated the increase in myocyte size and decreased interstitial collagen compared to AAC (Fig. 2 d, lower panel). Fig. 2 Quercetin reduced cardiac hypertrophy and inhibited the proteasome activities of the hearts of rats with pressure overload. a Representative changes in the cardiac morphology and cardiomyocyte enlargement collagen deposition in rats after fixation. b Body weight (BW) of rats at the first week, fourth week, and eighth week after treatment with quercetin or vehicle ( n = 10). c Quantitative analysis of the ratio of heart weight (left ventricle) to body weight (HW/BW) in different groups at 8 weeks after treatment with quercetin or vehicle ( n = 10). d Representative hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and Masson trichrome staining of hearts in different groups at 8 weeks after treatment, n = 3, scale bar = 25 μm. e Proteasome chymotrypsin-like, caspase-like, and trypsin-like activities in frozen hearts as visualized by a fluorescent peptide substrate in the five groups after treatment ( n = 6). Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA as the means ± SEM; * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01 vs. Sham; † P < 0.05; †† P < 0.01 vs. AAC. AAC (A) abdominal aorta constriction, Q quercetin, A + Q5 AAC + Q 5 mg/kg/day, A + Q10 AAC + Q 10 mg/kg/day, A + Q20 AAC + Q 20 mg/kg/day
Quercetin Inhibited the Proteasome Activities in AAC Rats
After 8 weeks of treatment and following echocardiography, heart tissues were dissected and frozen at − 80 °C. Some of the frozen tissues were homogenized to detect the proteasome activities. As shown in Fig. 2 e, the chymotrypsin-like peptidase, trypsin-like peptidase, and caspase-like peptidase activities of the proteasome were drastically increased in the AAC group (by 64.2, 62.7, and 53.9%, respectively). On the other hand, quercetin decreased the proteasome activities in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 2 e). This result suggests that quercetin might at least partially attenuate the cardiac hypertrophy induced by AAC in rats through the proteasome pathway or that quercetin is closely related to inhibition of the proteasome activities.
Quercetin Decreased the Cell Surface Area and Proteasome Activities in Hypertrophic Cardiomyocytes
To evaluate the effect of quercetin on Ang II-induced hypertrophy in primary cardiomyocytes of neonatal rats, we explored the changes in the cell surface area of hypertrophic myocytes. Ang II (1 μM) treatment caused an obvious increase in cardiomyocyte size (mean value of cell surface area) by 76.6%, which was attenuated by quercetin (20.86% of 10 μM, 38.98% of 20 μM, 32.55% of 40 μM), especially at 20 μM, while there was no significant difference between Con and DMSO (Fig. 3 a, b). The ANF mRNA level was also detected (Fig. 3 c), and the results were similar to those of the cell area. Therefore, 20 μM quercetin was chosen for the following experiments. We observed that three types of proteasome activities (chymotrypsin-like, caspase-like, and trypsin-like) were increased in the Ang II-treated group (by 30.9, 37.4, and 20.9%, respectively) and that quercetin at 20 μM significantly inhibited the proteasome activities of cardiomyocytes (by 29.2, 28.9, and 21.9%, respectively) (Fig. 3 d), which is consistent with the findings from rats. Protein ubiquitination was also detected by Western blotting. The ubiquitin levels of total protein were lower in the Ang II group, which means that the proteasome was activated, and were obviously increased after quercetin treatment at 20 and 40 μM (Fig. 3 e, f), which also suggests that proteasome activity was inhibited by quercetin. Fig. 3 Effect of quercetin on the cell surface area and proteasome activities in primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. Cells were treated with quercetin (10, 20, 40 μM dissolved in DMSO) and Ang II (1 μM, dissolved in ddH 2 O) or alone for 48 h and then were stained with phalloidin (tetramethylrhodamine B isothiocyanate (TRITC)) and DAPI or lysed and collected to detect the proteasome activities. a Immunofluorescent staining of cardiomyocytes, scale bar = 50 μm, n = 5. b Quantitative analysis of cell surface area by ImageJ software ( n = 5). c mRNA levels of ANF by RT-PCR ( n = 4). d Proteasome activities were analyzed using a fluorescent peptide substrate after treatment with Ang II and Q20 (quercetin 20 μM) or drugs alone ( n = 5). e Western blotting of ubiquitin in primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes after quercetin treatment (10, 20, 40 μM) for 48 h. f Densitometric quantification of ubiquitin after normalization to the GAPDH level ( n = 4). Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA. Values are presented as the means ± SEM. * P < 0.05 vs. Con; † P < 0.05; †† P < 0.01 vs. AngII. Con control, Ang II angiotensin II, Q quercetin, AN atrial natriuretic factor
Effect of Quercetin on Proteasome Subunits in AAC Rats and Hypertrophic Cardiomyocytes
Dosenko et al. previously reported [ ] that quercetin can directly inhibit purified 20S proteasome and 26S proteasome. Therefore, the effect of quercetin on the proteasome subunits was investigated in this study. The 20S proteasome has β1, β2, and β5 subunits, and the 19S proteasome has Rpt1 and Rpt4 subunits. To investigate the other mechanisms of quercetin on proteasome activities, besides the direct effects that the authors reported, western blotting was used to detect the levels of β1, β2, β5, Rpt1, and Rpt4 in hypertrophic hearts from rats and primary cardiomyocytes. Western blotting showed that the relative levels of PSMB1, PSMB2, PSMB5, Rpt1, and Rpt4 were significantly higher in the AAC group (by 83.7, 50.0, 46.5, 60.8, and 17.2%, respectively), but this increase was prevented by quercetin treatment in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 4 a–c). The findings in primary cardiomyocytes (Fig. 4 d–f) were in agreement with those in rats. In addition, we also tested the cytoplasmic and nuclear PSMB5 levels (a main subunit responding to chymotrypsin-like activity of the proteasome) in primary cardiomyocytes. Nuclear PSMB5 was obviously increased in the Ang II group, but this increase was prevented by quercetin, especially at 20 and 40 μM, while no significant difference was observed in the cytoplasm (Fig. 4 g). These results indicate that quercetin attenuates cardiac hypertrophy by significantly decreasing proteasome activities in hypertrophic cardiomyocytes and AAC rats. Quercetin-induced proteasome inhibition is related to the decreased amounts of 20S and 19S proteasome subunits. Fig. 4 Effect of quercetin on the 20S and 19S subunits of the proteasome from rat hearts and primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. a Western blotting of the 20S proteasome subunits PSMB5, PSMB2, and PSMB1 and 19S proteasome subunits RPT1 and RPT4 in rats and b , c their densitometric quantification after normalization to the GAPDH level (for PSMB1, PSMB2, and PSMB2, n = 6; Rpt1 and Rpt4, n = 4). Data are expressed as the means ± SEM. * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01 vs. Sham; † P < 0.05; †† P < 0.01 vs. AAC. d Western blotting of the 20S proteasome subunits PSMB5, PSMB2, and PSMB1 and 19S proteasome subunits RPT1 and RPT4 in primary cultured cells and e , f their densitometric quantification after normalization to the GAPDH level (for PSMB1, n = 6; PSMB2, n = 4; and PSMB5, n = 5; for Rpt1 and Rpt4, n = 6). g Western blotting of the 20S proteasome subunits to determine the PSMB5 ratio of nuclei to cytoplasm from primary cultured cell ( n = 4). Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA and are expressed as the means ± SEM. * P < 0.05 vs. Con; † P < 0.05 vs. Ang II. AAC (A) abdominal aorta constriction, Q quercetin, A + Q5 AAC + Q 5 mg/kg/day), A + Q10 AAC + Q 10 mg/kg/day, A + Q20 AAC + Q 20 mg/kg/day, Con control, Ang II angiotensin II (1 μM), Ang II + Q20 angiotensin II 1 μM and quercetin 20 μM
Quercetin Increased the Activity of GSK-3 in AAC Rats and Hypertrophic Primary Cardiomyocytes
GSK is one of the important regulatory factors of myocardial hypertrophy [ ], and we previously found that proteasome inhibition elevated GSK-3β activity [ ]. To determine whether GSK-3 activation was involved in the myocardial hypertrophy improved by proteasome inhibition, primary cardiomyocytes were treated with the GSK-3 inhibitor LiCl, and phosphorylated GSK-3α and GSK-3β were measured by western blotting. Compared to the Sham/Control group, the level of p-GSK-3 was obviously increased in the AAC/Ang II group, but this increase was prevented by quercetin treatment (Fig. 5 a–d). Additionally, the LiCl treatment dramatically increased the abundance of p-GSK-3α and p-GSK-3β (the inactive states) (Fig. 5 b, d), but had no effect on the activity of the proteasome (Fig. 5 e). As shown in Fig. 5 f, g, quercetin decreased the myocardial cell surface, but this decrease was prevented by LiCl up to the level in the Ang II group. Overall, these results suggest that the GSK-3 inhibitor LiCl blocked GSK-3 activity and reversed the protective effect of proteasome inhibition on cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in vivo and in vitro , indicating that quercetin inhibited the proteasome activities by activating GSK-3, resulting in improved cardiac hypertrophy. Fig. 5 Quercetin activated GSK-3 in rat hearts and in primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. a Western blotting of p-GSK-3α and p-GSK-3β in different groups of rats at 8 weeks after quercetin treatment. b Western blotting of p-GSK-3α and p-GSK-3β in primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes after quercetin treatment for 48 h and GSK-3 inhibitor LiCl (10 mM) treatment for 24 h. c , d Quantitative analysis of p-GSK-3α and p-GSK-3β in rats and cells (p-GSK-3α, p-GSK-3β normalization with total GSK-3) ( n = 6). e Proteasome activities were analyzed using a fluorescent peptide substrate in primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes 24 h after LiCl treatment ( n = 5). f Immunofluorescent staining of cardiomyocytes with phalloidin (tetramethylrhodamine B isothiocyanate (TRITC)) and DAPI after LiCl treatment, scale bar = 50 μm. g Quantitative analysis of cell surface area ( n = 5). Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA. Each value represents the means ± SEM. For c , * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01 vs. Sham; † P < 0.05; †† P < 0.01 vs. AAC. For d , e , g , * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01 vs. Con; † P < 0.05; †† P < 0.01 vs. Ang II; ‡ ‡ P < 0.01 vs. Ang II + Q20. AAC (A) abdominal aorta constriction, Q quercetin, A + Q5 AAC + Q 5 mg/kg/day, A + Q10 AAC + Q 10 mg/kg/day, A + Q20 AAC + Q 20 mg/kg/day, Con control, Ang II angiotensin II (1 μM), Ang II + Q20 angiotensin II 1 μM + quercetin 20 μM
The Effect of Quercetin on AKT and LKB1/AMPKα
The AKT pathway is the key signal molecule for the regulation of GSK-3 in myocardial hypertrophy [ ]. A previous study showed that activation of AMPKα attenuated cardiac hypertrophy by regulating the GSK-3 activity [ ]. Therefore, we next examined the effect of AKT and AMPK.
The levels of p-AKT and p-AMPKα were increased significantly in vehicle-treated rats but were attenuated in quercetin-treated rats after AAC (Fig. 6 a, b). The changes in the p-AKT and p-AMPKα levels in primary cardiomyocytes were consistent with the in vivo results (Fig. 6 c, d). LKB1, which is upstream of AMPK, was markedly decreased in quercetin-treated cardiomyocytes compared to the Ang II-induced hypertrophic group. These results suggested that quercetin reduced the activities of AKT and LKB1/AMPKα, which are upstream factors of GSK-3. Fig. 6 Quercetin inhibited proteasome activities through the AKT and /or LKB1/AMPK pathways. a Western blotting of p-AMPK and p-AKT. b Quantification of heart tissues in AAC-induced rats at 8 weeks after treatment with different doses of quercetin ( n = 4). Values are presented as the means ± SEM, * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01 vs. Sham group; † P < 0.05; †† P < 0.01, vs. AAC group. c Levels of p-AKT, p-AMPK, and p-LKB1 were determined by Western blotting in primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes 48 h after treatment with Ang II (1 μM), quercetin (20 μM), or nothing. d Their quantitative analysis in different groups (p-AKT, n = 6; p-AMPK and p-LKB1, n = 4). The data show the p-AKT normalization with Akt, p-LKB1 normalization with LKB1, and p-AMPK normalization with AMPK. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA. Values are presented as the means ± SEM, * P < 0.05 vs. Con; † P < 0.05; †† P < 0.01 vs. AngII
The Effect of Quercetin and GSK-3 Activation on Myocardial Hypertrophic Factors
To investigate the downstream factors of GSK-3 related to myocardial hypertrophy, we tested the changes in the phosphorylation of ERK, histone H3, β-catenin, and GATA4 [ , , ]. As shown in Fig. 7 a, b, p-ERK, p-histone H3, p-β-catenin, and GATA4 were increased in the Ang II group, but this increase was prevented by quercetin treatment. Moreover, we used GATA4 as an example to determine the effect of LiCl on GATA4. The immunofluorescence data showed that the total density of GATA4 increased and that GATA4 was mainly aggregated in the nucleus in the Ang II group, while GATA4 was transferred to the cytoplasm by quercetin (20 μM) (Fig. 7 c). On the other hand, LiCl treatment increased the abundance and transfer of GATA4 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus compared to the Ang II + Q20 group (Fig. 7 c). These data suggest that the changes in GATA4 are a GSK-3-dependent downstream factor of myocardial hypertrophy after quercetin treatment. Fig. 7 Effect of quercetin on hypertrophic factors in cardiomyocytes. a , b Levels of p-ERK, p-Histone H3, p-β-catenin, and GATA4 by western blotting in primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes after 48-h treatment with Ang II (1 μM), quercetin (20 μM), or nothing. b The data are shown in the graphs as p-ERK normalization with ERK, p-H3 normalization with H3, and p-β-catenin normalization with β-catenin ( n = 4). Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA. Values are presented as the means ± SEM, * P < 0.05 vs. Con; † P < 0.05. c Effect of quercetin on the GATA4 distribution in nucleus and cytoplasm by immunofluorescence staining with GATA4 and DAPI in primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes after treatment with LiCl (10 mM). Experiments were replicated three times. Scale bar = 50 μm
Taken together, these results suggest that the proteasome activities were inhibited after quercetin treatment and involved the subunits PSMB1, 2, and 5 and RPT1 and 4 and that cardiac myocyte hypertrophy was attenuated in vivo (e.g., HW/BW) and in vitro (the ANF mRNA level and cell surface area). In addition, the cardiac diastolic function was improved, which may be related to the decrease in the p-AKT and/or LKB1/AMPKα activities. This decrease would further activate GSK-3 and decrease hypertrophic factors, such as p-ERK, p-histone H3, p-β-catenin, and GATA4. It is possible that the nuclear transfer of GATA4 also may be involved (Fig. 8 ). Fig. 8 Schematic diagram of quercetin on myocardiocyte hypertrophy. Quercetin inhibited the proteasome activities. Proteasome inhibition elevated the activation of GSK-3α/β, which may be related to the AKT and/or LKB1/AMPKα pathway. GSK-3α and GSK-3β decreased hypertrophy by downregulating the levels of cardiac hypertrophic factors, p-ERK, p-histone H3, p-β-catenin, and GATA4, or the LKB1/AMPKα pathway may directly affect cardiac hypertrophy (including the decrease in HW/BW, mRNA level of ANF, and cell surface area) and then improved cardiac diastolic function
Discussion
The present study demonstrated for the first time that (i) quercetin inhibited three types of proteasome activities in a myocardial hypertrophy model in vivo and in vitro, (ii) quercetin improved cardiac hypertrophy via proteasome inhibition and subsequent activation of GSK-3, and (iii) the effect of quercetin on GSK-3 in cardiac hypertrophy was partially related to the AKT and AMPK pathway. These findings suggest that quercetin decreased myocardial hypertrophy through a new mechanism that is closely related to proteasome inhibition and downstream GSK-3 activation.
Protein synthesis and degradation is a dynamic process [ ] and is in balance with cell size in normal cardiomyocytes. Cardiac hypertrophy is characterized by faster protein synthesis than protein degradation [ ], with accompanying protein accumulation. Most protein synthesis and degradation processes are regulated by UPS. Partial inhibition of proteasome activity can prevent cardiac hypertrophy induced by pressure overload in rodents, while excessive inhibition of proteasome activity causes protein accumulation, leading to heart failure [ ]. An increase in proteasome subunit protein expression has been well documented in several models of cardiac hypertrophy. Increased proteasome activity may contribute to the progress of myocardial hypertrophy [ ]. Consistent with the findings from a previous study, proteasome activities were significantly increased in the primary cell culture Ang II group and rat AAC group in our study.
Quercetin, a group of naturally occurring compounds, is one of the most widely distributed bioflavonoids [ ]. The flavonoid quercetin is one of the most abundant polyphenolic compounds and is found in many fruits and vegetables. Various pharmacological studies have confirmed that quercetin reduces elevated blood pressure and ameliorates endothelial dysfunction as well as end-organ injury (cardiac, renal hypertrophy) in spontaneously hypertensive rats [ , ], but the underlying mechanisms remain to be further investigated. In our study, we found that quercetin obviously decreased cardiac hypertrophy (such as LVAW, LVPW) in the AAC rat model and also prevented an increase in surface area in a primary cardiac hypertrophic model. However, in our AAC-induced model, FS% and EF% were not decreased but were increased, suggesting that the heart pathology was still at a hypertrophic stage and not in heart failure. It is possible that quercetin prevents changes in EF% and FS% by preventing of heart overload with a higher EF and FS, but the underlying mechanism requires further investigation. However, we observed an effect of quercetin on hypertrophic histology according to HE staining and cell surface area values. Importantly, E/A and IVRT were also improved by quercetin, suggesting that quercetin ameliorates the diastolic function of the heart in AAC rats.
A previous study showed that quercetin directly inhibited the purified proteasome in anoxia reoxygenation [ ]. Moreover, UPS inhibition may prevent hypertrophy in mice [ ]. It is also evident that quercetin partially inhibits proteasome activities [ , ]. Here, we presented the first evidence that quercetin inhibited proteasome activity in the hypertrophic heart and cardiomyocytes (see Figs. 2 e and 3 d). In addition, the present study demonstrated that quercetin targeted the subunits of the 20S and 19S proteasomes and particularly decreased the levels of PSMB5 in the nucleus, resulting in inhibition of proteasome activities, indicating that quercetin inhibited the proteasome activities by different mechanisms.
No specific proteasome activator was found, so we did not treat rats or cells to determine whether the function of quercetin was dependent on the proteasome, which is a limitation of our study. However, to some extent, the effect of quercetin on myocardial hypertrophy was clearly related to proteasome inhibition because we observed that quercetin inhibited proteasome activity, and proteasome inhibition was shown to attenuate myocardial hypertrophy in previous reports [ , ].
In mammals, GSK-3 is presented as two ubiquitously expressed homologs, GSK-3α and GSK-3β. Both Ser21 of GSK-3α and Ser9 of GSK-3β are very important to regulate the activation of GSK-3, and phosphorylation at the two sites inhibits the activity of GSK-3 [ ]. GSK-3 plays an important role in cell growth regulation, metabolic regulation, and gene expression regulation as well as maintaining the integrity of the cytoskeleton [ ]. The role of GSK-3 in cardiac hypertrophy has been extensively studied both in vitro culture models and in vivo with gain and loss of function mouse models; it has been shown that GSK-3 inhibits cardiac hypertrophy [ , ]. There have been very few reports concerning the direct relationship between the proteasome and GSK-3 to date, especially in the heart. We previously found that proteasome inhibition by lactacystin, a specific inhibitor of the proteasome, could increase the phosphorylated level of GSK-3β in the rat hippocampus [ ]. A recent study showed that the ubiquitin-specific protease 14 (USP14), a 19S proteasome-associated deubiquitinase (DUB), may be a novel target for cardiac hypertrophy therapy via inhibition of the GSK-3β pathway [ ]. Another report found that the transcriptional activity of NFATc4 regulated by GSK-3 is related to the ubiquitin proteasome system [ ]. In our present study, the activities of GSK-3α and GSK-3β were significantly decreased in the Ang II and AAC groups, in agreement with the recent findings for GSK-3α [ ] and GSK-3β [ , ]. In addition, the reduced activities of GSK in the Ang II and AAC groups were prevented in the quercetin-treated group. Interestingly, after treatment with the GSK-3 inhibitor LiCl, the GSK activities were reversed and the level of phosphorylation of GSK was higher than in the Ang II group, while there was no significant difference in proteasome activities between the LiCl treated or untreated groups. This result suggested that quercetin decreased the proteasome activity by increasing GSK-3 activity, resulting in the prevention of cardiac hypertrophy, while GSK-3 did not affect proteasome activity, which also indirectly indicated that proteasome inhibition occurred upstream of GSK-3. Thus, our study supplies novel evidence on the relationship between proteasome inhibition and GSK-3, which is also the first discovery in a cardiac hypertrophic rodent model.
The AKT (also called protein kinase B) pathway is very important for the regulation of GSK-3. It is upstream of GSK-3β and can regulate the GSK-3β signaling pathways when stimulated by myocardial hypertrophy signals [ ]. AMPK, a serine/threonine protein kinase, is an energy sensor in cells [ ]. In the pressure overload state, the ratio of AMP to ATP was increased and AMPKα was activated, which is involved in regulating a variety of reactions in the cell. In the present study, we found that the activities of AKT and AMPKα were significantly increased in Ang II-induced myocardial hypertrophy. Quercetin prevented this change as well as the phosphorylation of AKT, AMPKα, and LKB1. LKB1 is a type of ubiquitin ligase, and its level is in accordance with proteasome activity [ ]. We found that the level of LKB1 was decreased after quercetin treatment, which also suggested that the proteasome was inhibited by quercetin.
In addition, to investigate the mechanism of GSK-3 on cardiac hypertrophy in our experimental models, we detected the downstream targets GSK-3, p-ERK, p-histone H3, p-β-catenin, and GATA4, which are also cardiac hypertrophic factors. We found that they were increased in the hypertrophic model group, which is in accordance with previous reports [ , , , ]. When treated with quercetin, the levels were close to normal, which has not previously been reported. Thus, this is the first evidence of the effect of quercetin on cardiac hypertrophic factors. Actually, it was reported that proteasome inhibition can decrease cardiac hypertrophy through regulating ERK [ ]. Upregulation of GATA4 in embryonic stem cells was abrogated by the proteasome inhibitor MG132 [ ]. Proteasome-mediated suppression of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway reduced the malignant activity of pancreatic and breast cancer [ ]. These reports showed that the proteasome can regulate cardiac hypertrophic factors, such as ERK, GATA4, and β-catenin. Thus, according to our results, we can conclude that quercetin may affect or modulate the hypertrophic factors through proteasome inhibition.
In our study, we aimed to use a proteasome activator to confirm the role of the proteasome in the attenuation of myocardial hypertrophy by quercetin, but no specific activator of UPS was identified, perhaps because it is a large system composed of many complicated parts. However, in our further studies, we will use other methods, such as RNAi, to modulate activation of the proteasome.
In summary, the present study provides novel evidence that quercetin inhibits the proteasome activities and increases GSK-3 activities in abdominal aortic constriction in rats and Ang II-induced myocardial hypertrophy. The GSK-3 inhibitor LiCl significantly reversed quercetin-induced GSK activation and cell protection in cardiomyocytes, but had no effect on the proteasome activities. These findings suggested that the proteasome pathway played an important role in the protective effect of quercetin on cardiac hypertrophy, which was related to activation of GSK-3 and its upstream/downstream effects. The findings of this study may shed light on a new potential mechanism underlying quercetin-mediated attenuation of cardiac hypertrophy. Other related mechanisms targeting quercetin and strategies targeting the proteasome in myocardial hypertrophy or heart failure require further investigation.