In basic research, only one intervention is usually studied at a time, and the potential interaction(s) between two or more drugs or interventions are rarely explored. On the other hand, in clinical research and clinical practice, new interventions or drugs are added on top of current “standard of care.” As interactions often occur, the net effects of each drug in a combination may be different from the effect of monotherapy, both in animal models and in humans. Aspirin was the first drug to show efficacy in patients with stable atherosclerosis [ ]. According to the 2012 American guidelines, “aspirin should be continued indefinitely in the absence of contraindications in patients with stable ischemic heart disease” [ ]. The 2013 European guidelines for stable coronary artery disease (CAD) state “aspirin remains the cornerstone of pharmacological prevention of arterial thrombosis” [ ]. The European guidelines give class I indication for low-dose aspirin in all patients with stable CAD [ ].
More recently, statins have shown profound effects on clinical outcomes in patients with atherosclerosis. According to the European and American guidelines, statins are recommended in all patients with stable CAD (class I indication) [ , , ]. Yet, a potential adverse interaction may exist when aspirin and statins are combined [ ]. This interaction is related to one of the off-target effect of statins, activation of ecto-5′ nucleotidase. This activation increases the conversion of AMP to adenosine, thereby increasing local extracellular adenosine concentrations and therefore, the physiological responses of the different adenosine receptors (A1, A2a, A2b, A3), depending on their local tissue expression [ ]. Activation of the adenosine receptors leads to Akt phosphorylation with downstream phosphorylation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) and upregulation and activation of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) [ ], which in turn activates cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) by S-nitrosylation [ , ]. S-nitrosylated COX2 generates prostaglandin H 2 (PGH 2 ), which is the precursor of the prostaglandins, and 15R-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (15-R-HETE), which is a precursor of inflammation-resolution eicosanoid 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 [ , ]. Aspirin also alters COX2 by acetylation. Acetylation of inactive COX2 leads to the generation of 15-R-HETE [ ]. On the other hand, aspirin-induced acetylation of COX2, that has been S-nitrosylated by iNOS, leads to complete inactivation of the enzyme [ ]. Thus, a combination of aspirin (especially at higher doses) and statins potentially attenuates the adenosine-dependent effects of statins, without affecting the lipid lowering effects of statins or the anti-platelet effects of aspirin [ , ]. This potential important interaction has not been studied in the clinical setting.
Ticagrelor, a P2Y 12 -receptor antagonist, also increases extracellular adenosine levels but by inhibition of the equilibrative nucleoside transporter-1 [ , , , ] and has been shown to induce adenosine-dependent activation of COX2 with increased production of prostacyclin and 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 [ ]. This adenosine-dependent increase in COX2 activity, induced by ticagrelor, can be blocked by concomitant administration of high-dose aspirin [ ]. As statin increases extracellular adenosine levels via enhanced production whereas ticagrelor increases extracellular adenosine levels by inhibition of reuptake into the cell, additive effects can be expected. Indeed, we have recently shown additive effects when rosuvastatin and ticagrelor are combined on myocardial adenosine levels, COX2 activity, the production of prostacyclin and 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 , and the activation of the prosurvival kinases [ ]. The combination also had an additive effect on inhibiting the NLRP3 inflammasome post-infarction and most importantly, on the reduction in the size of the myocardial infarction in a rat ischemia reperfusion model [ ]. The adenosine-dependent cardioprotective effects of ticagrelor have also recently been confirmed in a large animal pig model [ ].
Based on these previous studies, we hypothesized that aspirin, rosuvastatin, and ticagrelor will all have anti-inflammatory and anti-atherosclerosis effects in an animal model of accelerated atherosclerosis. We predicted that when combined, rosuvastatin and ticagrelor would have additive effects, whereas the anti-inflammatory and anti-atherosclerosis effects of both would be attenuated in combination with aspirin. As a comparator to ticagrelor, we used the alternative P2Y 12 -receptor antagonist clopidogrel that does not affect extracellular adenosine levels [ , ].
Materials and Methods
Animals
This study was approved by The University of Texas Medical Branch IACUC and conducted in accordance with “The Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” published by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH Publication No. 85-23, revised 1996). ApoE null mice (B6.129P2- Apoe tm1Unc /J c) and db /+ (heterozygous) on the C57BL/6 background were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. Because db/db (homozygous) mice are sterile, db /+ (heterozygous) mice were crossed with ApoE −/− mice. Male and female mice carrying ApoE +/− and db /+ from first generation were breed to generate the second offspring ApoE −/− /db + /db + double-knockout mice.
Treatment
ApoE −/− /db/db at age of 6 weeks received normal chow diet without or with rosuvastatin (5 mg/kg/day). In addition, mice received vehicle, aspirin (25 mg/kg/day), ticagrelor (300 mg/kg/day), clopidogrel (75 mg/kg/d), or their combinations (see below). Food consumption and body weight were assessed. At age of 20 weeks (after 14 weeks of treatment), fasting blood glucose, insulin, total cholesterol, triglycerides, creatinine, serum 6-keto-PGF 1α , 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 and hs-CRP, platelet aggregation, and bleeding time were determined. Glucose tolerance test was performed. Animals were sacrificed and the aortas collected.
The following groups were studied: 1. Control 2. Aspirin 3. Ticagrelor 4. Clopidogrel 5. Ticagrelor + aspirin 6. Rosuvastatin 7. Rosuvastatin + aspirin 8. Rosuvastatin + ticagrelor 9. Rosuvastatin + clopidogrel 10. Rosuvastatin + aspirin + ticagrelor 11. Rosuvastatin + aspirin + clopidogrel
Platelet Aggregation
Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) was prepared from blood sample of each mouse by centrifugation of whole blood anticoagulated with citrate dextrose at 800 rpm for 10 min at room temperature. Platelet aggregation was recorded after activation with 15 μM ADP using a platelet aggregation profiler (PAP-8). Data are expressed as the final percent aggregation response after 6 min [ , ].
Tail Vein Bleeding Time
Tail vein bleeding time was performed as described before [ , ]. Mice were anesthetized and placed on a 37 °C heating pad. The tail was lacerated 0.5 cm from the tip using a 21-G syringe needle. Then, the tail was immediately immersed in a 50-mL falcon tube filled with 37 °C saline. Bleeding time was recorded as the time at which bleeding stopped. Animals were observed for 6 h and examined on the next morning for signs of delayed bleeding.
Glucose Tolerance Test
Mice fasted for 4 h received glucose (1 g/kg of body weight) i.p. Blood samples were collected from tail vein before (0 min) and 30, 60, 90, and 120 min after the glucose administration. Blood glucose levels were determined using automated blood glucose meter (Wako Diagnostics, Richmond, VA).
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assays
After treatment completed, aorta samples were homogenized and prepared in radio-immunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (Sigma-Aldrich) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics). After centrifugation, the supernatant of the tissue lysate was collected. Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method. IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α levels in tissue were determined using ELISA kits (R&D system).
Blood and plasma were collected using EDTA as an anticoagulant and centrifuged for 15 min at 1000× g at 2–8 °C within 30 min of collection. Insulin was determined using Ultra-sensitive Mouse insulin ELISA kit (Crystal Chem); 6-keto-PGF 1α was determined using 6-keto Prostaglandin F1α ELISA Kit (Cayman Chemicals); 15-epi-LXA 4 was determined using ELISA kit (Oxford Biomedical Research); C-reactive protein (CRP) was measured using Mouse C-Reactive Protein/CRP ELISA Kit (R&D systems). Triglyceride was examined using Triglycerides assay kit (Abcam); total cholesterol was measured using Cholesterol Quantitation Kit (antibodies— online.com , Atlanta, GA) per manufacturer instructions. The absorbance was recorded at 450 nm with a plate reader.
Histology Staining and Quantification of Atherosclerosis
After euthanasia, mice were perfused with PBS for 15–20 min; aortas (from aortic root to branches) were collected and placed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 4–6 h, followed by placement in 30% sucrose for 24 h, and then stored in 10% formalin for at least 2–4 h. The aortas were rinsed with 70% ethanol for 30 s and stained with 0.5% Sudan IV solution (ethanol:acetone:H 2 O = 35:50:15) for 1 h. The aortas were opened longitudinally under a surgical microscope; images were captured with a digital camera and analyzed with Image-Pro Plus software to quantitate Sudan IV-stained lesion area. The fraction of the aortas covered by atherosclerotic lesions was determined by the ratio of Sudan IV-stained area to total aortic area.
Aortic Cholesterol Measurements
The aortas were perfused through the left ventricle with cold PBS and 5 mmol/L EDTA. All branches and any adipose tissue connected to the aortas were removed, and each aorta was carefully excised from the aortic root to the right renal artery. The aortas were stored briefly on ice in PBS and then blotted dry, weighed, minced, and extracted with chloroform/methanol (2:1). Total and free cholesterol levels in the aortic extracts were determined with an enzymatic fluorometric assay. The cholesteryl ester in each sample was calculated by subtracting the value for free cholesterol from that of total cholesterol.
Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as means ± standard error (SE). Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Sidak correction for multiple comparisons was applied to compare the different groups. The differences in glucose levels during the glucose tolerance test were compared using two-way repeated measure ANOVA with Holm-Sidak multiple comparison procedures. The p values of < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. In each figure, the p value of the ANOVA is shown along with symbols for the individual comparisons between specific groups.
Results
Body Weight
At the end of the treatment period, body weight was comparable to controls in all treatment groups apart from groups treated with rosuvastatin that all had a significantly and similar reduction in body weight relative to the controls (Fig. 1 a). Fig. 1 a . Body weight (g). There were 12 animals in each group. * p <0.001 vs. Control. b . Tail bleeding time (sec). There were 7 animals in each group. * p <0.001 vs. Control. c . ADP-induced platelet aggregation (%). There were 7 animals in each group. * p <0.001 vs. Control. d . Fasting serum glucose levels. There were 7 animals in each group. * p <0.001 vs. Control. e . Fasting plasma insulin levels. There were 7 animals in each group. Clop- clopidogrel; Ros- rosuvastatin; Tic- ticagrelor
Plasma Ticagrelor Levels
Plasma ticagrelor levels after 14 days of treatment were 13.45 ± 0.49 μM.
Bleeding Time and Platelet Aggregation
As expected, ticagrelor, aspirin, and clopidogrel alone or in combination prolonged bleeding time, whereas rosuvastatin alone had no effect. Bleeding time was comparable between ticagrelor, clopidogrel, aspirin, and ticagrelor + aspirin (Fig. 1 b). Similarly, ticagrelor, aspirin, and clopidogrel decreased platelet aggregation, whereas rosuvastatin alone had no effect (Fig. 1 c). Again, the effects of ticagrelor, aspirin, clopidogrel, and ticagrelor + aspirin were comparable. Rosuvastatin did not alter the effects of the other drugs on bleeding time or platelet aggregation when combined with the other drugs.
Glucose and Insulin Levels
Aspirin and ticagrelor significantly reduced fasting glucose levels, whereas rosuvastatin and clopidogrel had no effect (Fig. 1 d). The effect of ticagrelor was significantly greater than that of aspirin, and aspirin attenuated the effect of ticagrelor ( p < 0.001). Rosuvastatin did not alter the effect of aspirin but significantly attenuated the effect of ticagrelor ( p < 0.001 ticagrelor vs. ticagrelor + rosuvastatin; p < 0.001 ticagrelor + aspirin vs. ticagrelor + aspirin + rosuvastatin).
Fasting insulin levels were comparable among all the groups (Fig. 1 e). Intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test (Supplement Fig. 1 ) showed that aspirin, ticagrelor, and ticagrelor + aspirin reduced glucose levels, whereas clopidogrel and rosuvastatin had no effect. The effect of ticagrelor was significantly greater than that of aspirin alone ( p < 0.001), and aspirin attenuated the effect of ticagrelor ( p < 0.001 for ticagrelor vs. ticagrelor + aspirin). Rosuvastatin attenuated the effect of both ticagrelor ( p < 0.001 for ticagrelor vs. ticagrelor + rosuvastatin; p < 0.001 for ticagrelor + aspirin vs. ticagrelor + aspirin + rosuvastatin) and aspirin ( p < 0.001 for aspirin vs. rosuvastatin + aspirin).
Serum Lipid Levels
As expected, rosuvastatin alone or in combination with the other drugs significantly reduced total serum cholesterol whereas aspirin, ticagrelor, and clopidogrel had no effect (Fig. 2 a). Aspirin, ticagrelor, and clopidogrel did not alter the cholesterol-lowering effect of rosuvastatin. Rosuvastatin alone or in combination with the other drugs significantly reduced serum triglyceride levels (Fig. 2 b). Aspirin, ticagrelor, and clopidogrel had no effect on triglyceride levels, and the effect of rosuvastatin was not affected by their concomitant administration. Fig. 2 a Fasting serum cholesterol levels. There were seven animals in each group. * p < 0.001 versus control. b Fasting serum triglyceride levels. There were seven animals in each group. * p < 0.001 versus control. c Serum CRP levels. There were seven animals in each group. * p < 0.001 versus control; † p < 0.001 versus TIC + aspirin; ‡ p < 0.001 versus ROS + aspirin. d Plasma 6-keto-PGF 1α levels. There were seven animals in each group. * p < 0.002 versus control; † p < 0.001 versus TIC. e Plasma 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 . There were seven animals in each group. * p < 0.005 versus control; † p < 0.02 versus TIC. Clop, clopidogrel; Ros, rosuvastatin; Tic, ticagrelor
Serum CRP Levels
CRP was significantly, and similarly, reduced by aspirin, ticagrelor, and rosuvastatin, but not by clopidogrel (Fig. 2 c). Aspirin attenuated the effect of both ticagrelor ( p < 0.001 for aspirin + ticagrelor vs. ticagrelor) and rosuvastatin ( p < 0.001 for aspirin + rosuvastatin vs. rosuvastatin), but there was no interaction between clopidogrel and rosuvastatin. Interestingly, the effect of ticagrelor + rosuvastatin was comparable to that of ticagrelor ( p = 1.00) and rosuvastatin ( p = 1.00) alone, suggesting that maximal effect has been reached with each drug alone.
Serum Eicosanoid Levels
Aspirin decreased 6-keto-PGF 1α levels. In contrast, both ticagrelor and rosuvastatin equally increased 6-keto-PGF 1α levels, whereas clopidogrel had no effect. There was no interaction between ticagrelor and rosuvastatin, whereas aspirin completely blocked the effect of ticagrelor ( p < 0.001 for ticagrelor + aspirin vs. ticagrelor) and rosuvastatin ( p < 0.001 rosuvastatin + aspirin vs. rosuvastatin) (Fig. 2 d).
Aspirin, ticagrelor, and rosuvastatin all increased 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 levels, whereas clopidogrel had no effect (Fig. 2 e). The effect of ticagrelor was significantly greater than that of rosuvastatin. The levels of 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 were significantly higher in the rosuvastatin + ticagrelor group than those in the ticagrelor group ( p < 0.001) and the rosuvastatin group ( p < 0.001). Aspirin attenuated the effect of both ticagrelor ( p < 0.001) and rosuvastatin ( p < 0.001) to levels below that of aspirin ( p < 0.001). Clopidogrel did not alter the aspirin or rosuvastatin effects.
Extent of Aortic Atherosclerosis Plaque
Sudan IV staining of the aortas (Fig. 3 a and Supplement Figure 2 a) showed that aspirin, ticagrelor, and rosuvastatin all equally reduced the area of the atherosclerotic plaque. The combination of ticagrelor and rosuvastatin provided a significantly greater effect than that of ticagrelor alone ( p = 0.016) or rosuvastatin alone ( p = 0.03). In contrast, there was a negative interaction when aspirin and ticagrelor were combined ( p < 0.001 vs. ticagrelor; p < 0.001 vs. aspirin) as well as when aspirin and rosuvastatin were combined ( p < 0.001 vs. aspirin; p < 0.001 vs. rosuvastatin). Clopidogrel had no significant effect and did not alter the effects of the other drugs. Fig. 3 a Percent area of the aorta stained positive with Sudan Black. There were nine animals in each group. * p < 0.001 versus control; † p < 0.017 versus TIC. b Total cholesterol content in the aortas. There were eight animals in each group. * p < 0.002 versus control; † p < 0.034 versus TIC. c Cholesterol ester content in the aortas. There were eight animals in each group. * p < 0.001 versus control; † p < 0.001 versus TIC. d Free cholesterol content in the aortas. There were eight animals in each group. * p < 0.050 versus control; † p < 0.003 versus TIC. Clop, clopidogrel; Ros, rosuvastatin; Tic, ticagrelor
Lipid Content in the Aortic Wall
Ticagrelor, aspirin, and rosuvastatin all equally decreased the content of total cholesterol, free cholesterol, and cholesterol esters in the aortas (Fig. 3 b–d). Levels were significantly higher in the aspirin + ticagrelor group than those in the ticagrelor group ( p < 0.001; p < 0.001 and p < 0.001, respectively) and in the aspirin + rosuvastatin group than those in the rosuvastatin group ( p < 0.001; p < 0.001 and p < 0.001, respectively). Again, clopidogrel had no significant effect and did not alter the effects of the other drugs.
Inflammation Mediators Serum Levels
Aspirin, ticagrelor, and rosuvastatin decreased serum IL-1β levels. The effect of rosuvastatin was significantly smaller than that of ticagrelor ( p < 0.001) or aspirin ( p = 0.003) (Fig. 4 a). Adding aspirin to ticagrelor or to rosuvastatin did not change serum IL-1β levels compared to each drug alone. Combining rosuvastatin and ticagrelor resulted in significantly lower levels of IL-1β (ticagrelor + rosuvastatin vs. ticagrelor p = 0.029; ticagrelor + rosuvastatin vs. rosuvastatin p < 0.001). Clopidogrel had no significant effect and did not alter the effects of the other drugs. Fig. 4 a IL-1β content in the aortic wall. There were seven animals in each group. * p < 0.001 versus control; † p < 0.030 versus TIC; ‡ p < 0.030 versus TIC + ROS. b IL-6 content in the aortic wall. There were seven animals in each group. * p < 0.001 versus control; † p < 0.035 versus TIC; ‡ p < 0.010 versus TIC + ROS. c TNF-α content in the aortic wall. There were seven animals in each group; * p < 0.001 versus control; † p < 0.001 versus TIC; ‡ p < 0.001 versus TIC + ROS. Clop, clopidogrel; Ros, rosuvastatin; Tic, ticagrelor
A similar pattern of effects was seen for IL-6. Aspirin, ticagrelor, and rosuvastatin reduced serum IL-6 levels (Fig. 4 b). Rosuvastatin decreased IL-6 levels less than aspirin ( p = 0.005), ticagrelor ( p = 0.021), or ticagrelor + aspirin ( p = 0.006). Adding aspirin to ticagrelor or to rosuvastatin did not change serum IL-6 levels compared to each drug alone. However, combining rosuvastatin and ticagrelor resulted in significantly lower levels of IL-6 (ticagrelor + rosuvastatin vs. ticagrelor p = 0.002 vs. rosuvastatin p < 0.001). Clopidogrel had no significant effect and did not alter the effects of the other drugs.
TNF-α levels showed slightly different pattern of results (Fig. 4 c). Aspirin, ticagrelor, and rosuvastatin all decreased TNF-α levels (Fig. 4 c). The effects of aspirin and ticagrelor were comparable and greater compared to those of rosuvastatin ( p = 0.001 vs. aspirin; p < 0.001 vs. ticagrelor). In contrast to the effects on IL-1β and IL-6, aspirin attenuated the effect of both ticagrelor ( p < 0.001) and rosuvastatin ( p < 0.001), and there was no additive effect of combining ticagrelor and rosuvastatin. Clopidogrel had no significant effect and did not alter the effects of the other drugs.
Discussion
The progression of atherosclerosis depends on complex interactions between dyslipidemia, inflammation, and platelets [ ]. In the current study, we evaluated the anti-atherosclerosis effects of rosuvastatin, a potent statin that affects dyslipidemia, and three anti-platelet agents (aspirin, ticagrelor, and clopidogrel) with different modes of action. We found that both aspirin and ticagrelor attenuated vessel inflammation and atherosclerosis, whereas clopidogrel, despite achieving similar degree of platelet inhibition, had no effect on inflammation and atherosclerosis in our model. This suggests that the benefit of aspirin and ticagrelor should not be solely ascribed to their anti-platelet effects. We found an intricate interaction between aspirin, ticagrelor, and rosuvastatin, as aspirin reduced the ability of both ticagrelor and rosuvastatin to ameliorate inflammation and atherosclerosis. In contrast, we found additive effects when ticagrelor and rosuvastatin were combined. The interaction between aspirin, ticagrelor, and rosuvastatin cannot be explained by reduced bioavailability or activity of the individual drugs. Rosuvastatin did not affect the decrease in platelet aggregation or the prolongation of bleeding time induced by aspirin or ticagrelor. On the other hand, neither ticagrelor nor aspirin altered the effects of rosuvastatin on total serum cholesterol and triglycerides levels. In addition, clopidogrel had no effect on inflammation and atherosclerosis despite having similar effects as ticagrelor and aspirin on bleeding time and platelet aggregation.
Aspirin and Atherosclerosis
Aspirin was the first drug to show efficacy in reducing adverse cardiovascular events among patients with stable atherosclerosis [ ]. According to the guidelines, aspirin is the first line therapy for patients with stable atherosclerosis [ , ]. The unique property of aspirin on cardiovascular events is in contrast to the effects of other cyclooxygenase inhibitors that are associated with increased risk for cardiovascular events [ , ]. At a low dose, aspirin blocks cyclooxygenase-1 (COX1) and thus, the platelet production of thromboxane, a platelet agonist and a vasoconstrictor, thereby providing anti-thrombotic effect. COX1 is constitutively active whereas cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) is activated by S-nitrosylation by iNOS to produce prostacyclin, a platelet inhibitor and vasodilator and 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 , a potent anti-inflammatory mediator. At higher doses, aspirin also interacts with COX2 in the vasculature, inhibiting prostacyclin production, thereby offsetting the anti-thrombotic effect of the COX1 inhibition. Aspirin acetylates COX2 at the Ser 530 near the active site of the enzyme [ ]. Acetylation of an inactive COX2 leads to conversion of arachidonic acid to 15R-HETE instead of PGH 2 , the precursor of prostacyclin. 15R-HETE is converted by 5-lipoxygenase to 15-epi-lipoxin A 4. In contrast, acetylation of COX2 that has been activated by S-nitrosylation by iNOS inactivates the enzyme completely [ ]. While the anti-inflammatory effects and inflammation-resolution properties of 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 have been described in numerous in-vitro and animal models [ , ], the importance of 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 in the clinical setting has not been adequately assessed. One study showed that aspirin at 81 mg per day, but not at 325 or 650 mg per day, increased serum 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 levels in healthy subjects [ ]. Aspirin reduces IL-1β and IL-6 secretion by inflammatory M1 macrophages in man and animals [ ]. Aspirin also attenuates the progression of atherosclerosis in experimental models [ , , ]; however, it is unclear whether this effect is mediated by 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 . Here, we found that aspirin increased the production of 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 ; however, when aspirin was combined with either ticagrelor or rosuvastatin, the production of 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 was blocked. This effect of rosuvastatin and ticagrelor is likely explained by the fact that both ticagrelor and rosuvastatin can increase COX2 S-nitrosylation via increasing extracellular adenosine levels [ ].
Until recently, the mandatory role of aspirin in patients with coronary artery disease and especially after coronary stent implantation has not been questioned. However, a recent study suggested that in patients with atrial fibrillation undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention, the combination of dual therapy with rivaroxaban and a P2Y12 antagonist resulted in similar rates of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or stroke compared to the use of triple therapy with vitamin K antagonist + P2Y12 antagonist + aspirin but induced less bleeding, suggesting that aspirin can be omitted in certain patients [ ].
Statins and Atherosclerosis
Statins, like aspirin, are recommended for all patients with stable atherosclerosis [ , , ], as statins have been shown to reduce adverse cardiovascular outcomes [ ] and attenuate the progression of coronary atherosclerosis in patients [ ]. Numerous non lipid-lowering pleiotropic effects of statins have been described in animal models, as well as in healthy volunteers; however, the importance of these lipid-lowering-independent effects in the clinical setting is unclear [ ]. Many, but not all, of these lipid-lowering-independent effects of statins are mediated by the activation of ecto-5′ nucleotidase, leading to generation of adenosine [ ]. Activation of the adenosine receptors leads to Akt phosphorylation with downstream phosphorylation of eNOS and upregulation and activation of iNOS and COX2 [ , ]. Similar to aspirin, statins also augment the production of 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 in animal models [ , , ]. As predicted, we found that when aspirin and statins are combined, COX2 is inactivated and the production of prostacyclin and 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 is blocked causing the effects of each individual drug on inflammation and atherosclerosis to be attenuated.
Ticagrelor and Atherosclerosis
The study of Platelet Inhibition and Patient Outcomes (PLATO) demonstrated the superiority of ticagrelor over clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes [ ]. However, two PLATO sub-group analyses are of interest for the findings in our mouse study. First, an interaction with geographic region suggested reduced efficacy of ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in North American patients. This could be due to play of chance, but an interaction with the maintenance dose of aspirin has been suggested, as higher maintenance doses of aspirin were used to a greater extent in North America [ ] . Secondly, an interaction with lipid-lowering therapy suggested increased efficacy of ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients taking lipid-lowering drugs at randomization. As no information is available regarding the continued use of statins throughout the study, this observation needs to be interpreted with caution [ ]. Ticagrelor, like statins, also increases the extracellular levels of adenosine, which in turn increases the production of prostacyclin and 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 [ , , ]. This effect is attenuated by concomitant administration of aspirin [ ], and augmented when ticagrelor and rosuvastatin are combined [ ], which was confirmed in the current study. Long-term use of ticagrelor has been shown to decrease the rate of cardiovascular events in patients after acute coronary syndromes [ , ]. It could be that some of the clinical benefit is related to adenosine-mediated effects including 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 release, in addition to its well-established anti-platelet properties. A recent study reported that ticagrelor treatment for 25 weeks induced stabilization of the atherosclerotic plaques in apolipoprotein-E-deficient mice with a trend towards reduction of total plaque size [ ].
We have previously shown that ticagrelor decreases IL-1β and IL-6 after myocardial infarction [ ]. The results of the current study show that long-term ticagrelor administration decreases serum IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α more than rosuvastatin alone.
Clopidogrel and Atherosclerosis
Clopidogrel has been widely used in addition to aspirin in patients with coronary artery disease, especially after acute coronary syndromes. In contrast to ticagrelor, clopidogrel does not augment extracellular adenosine levels [ ]. However, as both ticagrelor and clopidogrel inhibits platelet activation, they should both exerts some anti-inflammatory properties by attenuating the amplifying role the activated platelets play in inflammatory processes. Studies have found that clopidogrel attenuates the progression of atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E knockout mice [ ] and hyperlipidemic rabbits [ ]. A recent study in healthy volunteers that received intravenous lipopolysaccharide found that both ticagrelor and clopidogrel equally reduced serum TNF-α and chemokine (C–C motif) ligand 2 levels. However, ticagrelor had a greater effect on suppressing IL-6 and growth colony-stimulating factor, and only ticagrelor significantly decreased IL-8 levels and increased IL-10 levels [ ], suggesting that ticagrelor may have additional anti-inflammatory effects. In contrast, in our model, clopidogrel had no effect on serum CRP, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α or the progression of atherosclerosis. A recent clinical study reported that carotid atherosclerotic plaque inflammation, as assessed by 18 F-flurodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography equally decreased after 6-month therapy with clopidogrel or ticagrelor. However, all patients received aspirin and statins [ ]. Our study confirms that when added to aspirin and rosuvastatin, no difference in atherosclerosis can be found between ticagrelor and clopidogrel.
IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α and Atherosclerosis
Immunity and inflammation has a major role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis [ ]. Data from both experimental models and epidemiologic cohorts support that IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α have major role in the progression of atherosclerosis [ , ]. In a meta-analysis of up to 29 population-based prospective studies, adjusted relative risks for non-fatal MI or coronary heart disease death per 1-SD higher levels of TNF-α was 1.17 (95% CI 1.09 to 1.25), and for IL-6, the corresponding risk was 1.25 (1.19–1.32) [ ]. A recent phase-3 clinical trial demonstrated that canakinumab, an IL-1β inhibitor, reduced the rate of recurrent cardiovascular events in patients with previous myocardial infarction without an effect on serum lipids [ ]. IL-1β induces both its own production, as well as the synthesis and expression of multiple secondary inflammatory mediators, including IL-6 [ ]. TNF-α affects IL-1β expression [ ].
Data suggest that 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 blocks TNF-α expression [ ] and activity, including activation of neutrophils [ , ]. It was also reported that 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 attenuates IL-1β release after TNF-α stimulation [ ]. Here, we see an exact mirror image between 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 levels and TNF-α levels, suggesting that 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 affects TNF-α expression.
As above mentioned, the intricate interactions between aspirin, ticagrelor, and rosuvastatin in our diabetic mouse model of atherosclerosis cannot be explained by alteration in drug bioavailability or activity. As was previously reported, we found no interaction between rosuvastatin and ticagrelor on platelet reactivity [ ]. Yet, their combination resulted in significantly more attenuation in IL-1β and IL-6 levels than ticagrelor or rosuvastatin alone. In contrast, the magnitude of the effects on TNF-α and CRP levels was comparable between ticagrelor alone and ticagrelor + rosuvastatin. It seems that the effects of the drugs on 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 levels almost mirror the effects on and atherosclerosis, suggesting an association. However, other signaling pathways probably exist, and the effects of the drugs on IL-1β and IL-6 seem to be independent of the effects of the drugs on 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 levels. It remains to establish a cause and effect between the anti-inflammatory properties of 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 and the effects on atherosclerosis of these drugs.
Limitations
We used an accelerated model of atherosclerosis in mice with type 2 diabetes. For example, such a dramatic effect of aspirin on the progression of atherosclerosis has not been described in humans (although the clinical efficacy on prevention of clinical events is established). It has yet to be shown if such dramatic effects and interactions exist in other models of atherosclerosis in rodents and especially in the clinical setting. Interestingly, in the Examining Use of Ticagrelor in Peripheral Artery Disease (EUCLID) trial, outcomes were comparable among patients with symptomatic peripheral artery disease randomized to clopidogrel or ticagrelor [ ]. At enrolment, 73% of the patients received statins and 66–67% received aspirin. It should be mentioned that in the trial, the use of caffeine was not restricted. Thus, it is possible that caffeine consumption blocked the adenosine receptors and attenuated the pleiotropic effects of the statins and ticagrelor [ ].
We used higher doses of the drugs than those used in patients. However, mice have different metabolism and the doses are based on previous studies. It has yet to be shown if such interactions occur in patients with the standard doses of the medications.
In the current study, we used rosuvastatin. However, previously, we have shown an interaction between aspirin and atorvastatin on protection against myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury [ , ]. Thus, such an interaction occurs with the two most potent and widely used statins in the market.
If similar interactions between aspirin, statins, and ticagrelor exist in humans with atherosclerosis and/or diabetes as seen in this mouse model, it could have significant effect on the progression of atherosclerosis and outcomes. Yet, there is no clinical trial so far that have explored these potential interactions. Further studies are needed to verify whether changes in 15-epi-lipoxin A 4 can fully explain our results on the progression of atherosclerosis and whether such interaction have significance in the clinical setting.