Introduction
In clinical trials, patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) randomized to the beta-blockers carvedilol, metoprolol succinate, or bisoprolol had lower rates of hospitalization and mortality than patients randomized to placebo [ , , , , , , , , , , , ]. Beta-blockers acutely reduce blood pressure and heart rate, potentially leading to hypotension and bradycardia, and can trigger decompensation and worsening of HFrEF symptoms; however, with gradual up-titration, the majority of trial participants were able to tolerate relatively high doses [ ]. Prescription of carvedilol, metoprolol succinate, or bisoprolol for patients with HFrEF is strongly recommended in treatment guidelines [ ] and is a performance measure in inpatient and outpatient settings [ ]. Uptake of beta-blockers among patients with HFrEF was initially low following the clinical trials demonstrating benefits, but more recent studies have demonstrated higher rates of prescription of beta-blockers following HFrEF hospitalizations [ , , , , , , , , , ]. However, in clinical practice, not all eligible HFrEF patients receive one of the guideline-recommended beta-blockers; the average beta-blocker doses are substantially lower than target doses used in clinical trials, and the frequency of up-titration is low [ , , ]. The purpose of this qualitative study was to assess barriers to beta-blocker use and up-titration experienced by primary care physicians, who manage much of the day-to-day medical care for people with HFrEF in the USA [ ]. We selected the nominal group technique as the qualitative method because nominal groups allow for the identification and ordinal ranking of barriers and challenges in medical practice [ , , ].
Methods
Study Participants
Practicing primary care physicians were recruited from the University of Alabama at Birmingham’s Deep South Continuing Medical Education network. This network offers online continuing medical education courses and includes members from across the USA. Physicians were eligible if they treated adult patients with HFrEF. Potential participants were provided a written description of the purpose, risks, and benefits of the study; the voluntary nature of the study was emphasized. The University of Alabama at Birmingham Institutional Review Board approved this study with a waiver of the requirement to obtained written documentation of informed consent.
Nominal Group Sessions
Nominal groups are structured, moderated group discussions around a specific question [ , , ]. Participants first list responses to the question, then rank the importance of the items on the list. We conducted 4 nominal group sessions with 4–5 participants per session, with a total of 19 participants. A moderator led each session, assisted by a scribe. Participants called into a conference call line and logged into a website designed to support nominal groups. The moderator reiterated the voluntary nature of the study and informed participants that the conversation would be recorded. After describing the purpose of the study and the nominal group procedure, the moderator read the following prompt which was also displayed on the website: “The beta-blockers metoprolol succinate (brand names Toprol XL and Dutoprol), carvedilol (brand names Coreg and Coreg CR), and bisoprolol (brand names Zebeta and Ziac) are recommended in treatment guidelines for patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction. When treating your patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, what challenges do you face in using these beta-blockers?” Each of the participants wrote down their responses to the question during a 5-min silent period. They were then asked to contribute a single idea expressed as a phrase or brief sentence in a round-robin format. The contributions were captured verbatim by the scribe and displayed as part of a list of contributed items on the participants’ screens. This process was repeated until the group felt that all significant ideas had been captured. List items were then reviewed to ensure that all participants had a shared understanding of the items. Each participant then chose the three items that she or he thought were most important and ranked those items using tools built into the website.
The process was repeated with a second prompt: “National clinical practice guidelines recommend starting patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction on modest doses of metoprolol succinate, carvedilol, or bisoprolol, and then increasing the dose over time to a relatively high target dose or, if the patient cannot tolerate the target dose, the maximum tolerated dose. For your heart failure patients on metoprolol succinate, carvedilol, or bisoprolol, what challenges do you face in up-titrating dosages?”
Each nominal group session lasted approximately 90 minutes.
Survey
Following the nominal group session, participants were sent a link to an online survey. They were asked to report age, gender, race, Hispanic/Latino ethnicity, and number of years in practice. In addition, participants were asked “Do you consider it your responsibility to prescribe and up-titrate beta-blockers in heart failure patients?” with possible answers “yes,” “no,” and “unsure”.
Analysis
We calculated means and ranges or counts for demographic characteristics of participants. Additionally, we calculated the counts for responses to whether the participants considered it their responsibility to manage beta-blockers. In order to evaluate the contribution of broader categories of barriers and to analyze results across nominal group sessions, individual items were categorized into themes by investigators. The themes were based on concepts stated by the participants without an a priori conceptual framework [ ]. We counted the number of groups that discussed each theme and the number of items in each theme. Percentages of available votes were calculated for each theme. Each participant had a total of six votes for each question with three votes assigned to the item selected as the most important, two for the second most important, one for the third most important, and zero for all other items.
Results
Nominal group participants came from 10 states of the USA (Alabama, Florida, Illinois, Mississippi, North Carolina, New Jersey, New York, Wisconsin, Texas, and Virginia). Sixteen of the 19 nominal group participants completed the post-session demographic survey. The average age was 47 years, 4 participants were female, 1 was Hispanic/Latino, 3 were Asian, and 13 were White (Table 1 ). The participants had been in practice an average of 16 years. All but one of the participants reported that they were responsible for the management of beta-blockers in their patients with HFrEF. Table 1 Characteristics of primary care physicians who participated in nominal groups on barriers to beta-blocker use and up-titration in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction Characteristic a Mean and range or N Age, years 47 (29–74) Gender Female 4 Male 12 Ethnicity Hispanic/Latino 1 Not Hispanic/Latino 15 Race Asian 3 White 13 Years in practice, years 16 (1–47) Do you consider it your responsibility to prescribe and up-titrate beta-blockers in heart failure patients? Yes 15 No 0 Uncertain 1 a Sixteen of nineteen participants completed surveys following the nominal group sessions
Participants in the nominal groups identified 55 barriers to beta-blocker use in patients with HFrEF (11–15 items per nominal group session) (Supplemental Table 1 ). Many of the items were similar across groups. For example, items related to hypotension or low blood pressure were mentioned in each of the four groups. From the 55 barriers, we identified six themes: treatment/side effects, polypharmacy, healthcare system barriers, comorbidities, patient communication/buy-in, and physician knowledge/experience. All of the themes except physician knowledge/experience were discussed in at least two of the nominal group sessions. Items related to the theme treatment/side effects were most common (Table 2 ). Treatment/side effects were ranked as the most important barrier to beta-blocker use (Fig. 1 ). Examples of items in the treatment/side effects theme include “Initial low blood pressure limits the use of beta blockers,” “Patients already experiencing fatigue or sluggishness may not want to add another medicine with that side effect,” and “Existing slow heart rate.” Polypharmacy and healthcare system barriers were ranked as the next most important themes. An example of items classified as healthcare system barriers included “Inconsistency between primary care and specialty following guidelines”. Patient communication/buy-in included items related to difficulties in explaining the importance of beta-blockers, patient comprehension of therapeutic options, and patient values about taking the medications. Examples included “Convincing patients to comply when they are no longer symptomatic” and “Patient characteristics make adherence difficult - miscommunication is an issue due to poor cognitive function.” Table 2 Frequency of themes identified in nominal group sessions ( n = 4) as barriers to use and up-titration of beta-blockers in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction Theme Number of statements in the theme Number of groups in which the theme was discussed Barriers to use of beta-blockers Treatment/side effects 30 4 Polypharmacy 3 2 Healthcare system barriers 10 3 Comorbidities 7 4 Patient communication/buy-in 4 2 Physician knowledge/experience 1 1 Barriers to up-titration of beta-blockers Treatment/side effects 19 4 Patient communication/buy-in 7 3 Polypharmacy 6 4 Healthcare system barriers 9 3 Physician knowledge/experience 4 2 Comorbidities 4 3 Legal concerns 1 1 Timing of medications 1 1 Fig. 1 Ranking of themes identified by primary care physicians in nominal group sessions as barriers to use and up-titration of beta-blockers in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction. Each participant had six votes with three votes assigned to the item ranked the most important, two to the second most important item, one to the third most important item, and zero to all other items. Items were grouped into themes by investigators
Participants identified 51 barriers to beta-blocker up-titration (11–15 items per session) from which we identified 8 themes: treatment/side effects, patient communication/buy-in, polypharmacy, healthcare system barriers, physician knowledge/experience, comorbidities, legal concerns, and timing of medications (Supplemental Table 2 ). All themes, except for legal concerns and timing of medications, were discussed in at least two of the nominal group sessions. As with barriers to beta-blocker use, items related to treatment/side effects were the most common and were ranked the most important. Hypotension and increasing probability of treatment/side effects with increasing doses were frequently identified barriers. Patient communication/buy-in (for example, “Patient compliance with visits – can’t up-titrate if the patient won’t come back in” and “Difficult to convince the patient to increase the dose or change what they are doing when they might not perceive a benefit”), polypharmacy, and system barriers (for example, “Difficulty with pharmacy management companies - not willing to up-titrate within a 30-day period” and “If cardiologists don't up-titrate then it makes [primary care physicians] question the need to increase the medication”) were ranked as the second, third, and fourth most important themes.
Discussion
Primary care physicians in this study identified treatment/side effects as the most important barriers to use and up-titration of beta-blockers in their patients with HFrEF. The beta-blocker effects on blood pressure and heart rate, which can lead to dizziness and fatigue, are intrinsic to the mechanism of action of these medications. Although these symptoms and side effects did not prevent trial participants from tolerating relatively high doses after careful up-titration, the experience of trial participants and investigators may not be applicable to many patients with HFrEF in the general population and their treating physicians. Few older adults with HFrEF meet the eligibility criteria of trials because of age, frailty, and comorbidities [ ]. These characteristics may reduce patients’ ability to tolerate the effects of beta-blockers and physicians’ willingness to risk adverse effects, particularly at high doses [ ]. Additionally, patients in clinical practice are rarely monitored with the same frequency as trial participants, potentially increasing concerns about harms from side effects. Comorbidities and polypharmacy were also identified as barriers to beta-blocker use and up-titration. Comorbidities and polypharmacy reflect the complex medical state of many patients with HFrEF and may be difficult to intervene upon to increase guideline-concordant use of beta-blockers. These findings suggest to a need to develop, evaluate, and disseminate successful protocols for beta-blocker up-titration in primary care settings that can be safely and effectively implemented among patients who have HFrEF in addition to other comorbidities. Carefully designed education interventions for physicians and patients with HFrEF may also increase guideline-concordant use of beta-blockers [ , ]. Dissemination of trial results through continuing medical education likely increased the prescription of beta-blockers following publication of trials demonstrating benefits in patients with HFrEF. Continuing medical education has the potential to improve physicians’ abilities to manage beta-blocker side effects and counsel patients about these treatments.
Primary care physicians also identified several categories of barriers that may be amenable to intervention, including system barriers, patient communication/buy-in, and physician knowledge/experience. For example, prescriptions for chronic disease management are often issued for 28 or 30 days with set co-payments. Increasing doses at shorter intervals can be costly for the patient and require additional work on the part of the physician. Changes in pharmacy management company policies for medications that are intended to be titrated or calendar packs with increasing strength may increase rates of up-titration [ ]. Coordination between primary care and cardiology may also increase beta-blocker use and up-titration, particularly clear delineation of responsibility for decisions regarding prescriptions for beta-blockers.
The nominal group technique allowed us to elicit barriers to beta-blocker use and up-titration in patients with HFrEF from primary care physicians in clinical practice. This technique facilitates the identification of multiple perspectives on an issue, encourages contributions from participants without strong opinions or dominant personalities, elicits diverse and thoughtful discussion of controversial causes [ ], and identifies and prioritizes underlying causes of a problem [ , ]. Perspectives of primary care physicians are likely to differ from cardiologists and other physicians at academic medical centers. Although academic physicians are often involved in research and creation of guidelines for treating patients with HFrEF, most physicians in the USA are not faculty members in academic medical centers [ ]. Physicians practicing outside of academic medical settings may not be closely connected to development and implementation of practice guidelines. The importance of primary care physicians’ role in care of patients with HFrEF is reflected by the large majority of participants who reported that they were responsible for beta-blocker management in patients with HFrEF, without necessarily relying on consultation from cardiologists or other experts in HFrEF. However, the number of participants in this study was small (only 19 primary care physicians), and the participants may not represent the breadth of experience of primary care providers in the USA. Additionally, this study was designed to ascertain perceived barriers experienced by primary care physicians, not absolute contraindications to beta-blockers. For example, asymptomatic low blood pressure may be viewed as a barrier to up-titration of beta-blockers for a primary care physician caring for a patient with HFrEF, but a cardiologist, who may have more experience with low blood pressure in HFrEF patients, may well be more aggressive with blood pressure lowering when caring for the same patient. Barriers to beta-blocker use and up-titration identified in this study may not be generalizable outside of the USA. In particular, barriers related to the health care and legal systems may be specific to the USA.
The barriers to beta-blocker use and up-titration identified by primary care providers may help explain why many patients with HFrEF are not on beta-blockers or are on much lower than recommended doses of beta-blockers. Barriers related to the health system, physician knowledge/experience, and patient communication/buy-in may be amenable to intervention but were judged to be relatively less important. Barriers related to the blood pressure and heart rate lowering effects of beta-blockers and the complexity of the medical needs of patients with HFrEF were considered the most important and may be difficult to intervene upon. Addressing these barriers may require the development and testing of safe protocols for beta-blocker initiation and up-titration appropriate for implementation in primary care.