Introduction
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a chronic disease that affects nearly 30 million Americans by recent reports, with 90–95% having type 2 DM as estimated by the 2014 National Diabetes Statistics Report [ ]. In addition to microvascular complications of retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy, DM carries approximately a twofold or greater risk of “macrovascular” cardiovascular events including myocardial infarction (MI), stroke, and cardiovascular death when compared to non-diabetic cohorts with similar risk factors [ , ].
Given the increasing incidence of diabetes and the significant cardiovascular risk conferred to those with this disease, there have been extensive efforts to reduce cardiovascular risk factors overall. This risk reduction strategy has been bolstered by studies demonstrating improved outcomes through the management of glycemia, dyslipidemia, and hypertension. Current society recommendations for risk factor target goals are listed in Table 1 . This review will primarily focus on the recent development and evaluation of existing therapies for selected risk factors in patients with type 2 diabetes, rather than previously established management strategies. When relevant, a distinction will be made between primary and secondary prevention in diabetes, although the preponderance of evidence addresses the former. We will not address the evidence for use of aspirin in patients with diabetes for primary prevention as it remains controversial and has been summarized in a recent review and position statement by Pignone et al., in which the authors concluded that the use of low-dose aspirin may be reasonable in diabetic patients with a 10-year cardiovascular risk exceeding 10% [ ]. Lifestyle modifications, including exercise, weight loss, and smoking cessation, remains essential in the comprehensive care for the diabetic patient but will not be specifically addressed in this review. Lastly, revascularization strategies for established stable ischemic heart disease (SIHD) in patients with diabetes have been recently addressed in updated guidelines [ ]. Table 1 Current cardiovascular risk factor management guidelines by society Risk factor in diabetic patient AACE/ACE for diabetes management (2015) [ ] AHA/ACC (2013) [ ] JNC 8 (2014) [ ] Glycated hemoglobin/A1c (%) < 7.0 – – LDL-C (mg/dL) < 100 (< 70 for high risk) No specific target Age 40–75—moderate-intensity statin (high-intensity for 10-year ASCVD risk 7.5% or higher) – Non-HDL cholesterol < 130 (< 100 for high risk) – – Systolic blood pressure (mmHg) Around 130 – < 140
Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes
The increased risk of macrovascular complications of MI, stroke, and cardiovascular death conferred by long-standing diabetes has been well established. The elevated cardiovascular event rate in this population was similar to patients with prior MI in earlier natural history studies [ , ]. This observation prominently led to societies such as the National Cholesterol Education Program considering DM as a coronary artery disease (CAD) risk equivalent [ ]. Patients with diabetes also were observed in older studies to have increased rates of reinfarction, congestive heart failure, and death following a cardiac event when compared to non-diabetic patients [ , , ]. Similarly, patients with diabetes have also been shown to be at an increased incidence of peripheral arterial disease (PAD) and cerebrovascular disease [ , ]. In the prospectively designed Perth Community Stroke Study, presence of diabetes was one of the strongest predictors of major stroke, with a significant hazard ratio of approximately 2.5 [ ].
The pathophysiology of diabetic cardiovascular disease is complex and poorly understood; a full discussion of which is beyond the scope of this review. In brief summary, chronic hyperglycemia in diabetes has been shown to induce endothelial dysfunction by reducing the availability of vaso-relaxing factors (e.g., nitric oxide and prostacyclins), by increasing the production of damaging reactive oxygen species, and by reducing production and impairing function of endothelial progenitor cells [ ]. Furthermore, there is considerable evidence that upregulation of endothelial vasoconstrictors such as endothelin-1 directly contributes to endothelial dysfunction and the development of atherosclerosis in patients with diabetes [ , ]. Common patterns of dyslipidemia in patients with diabetes, namely decreased concentrations of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), increased triglycerides, and increases in small dense low-density lipoprotein (LDL), are thought to contribute to increased cardiovascular risk [ ]. Upregulation of the renin-angiotensin system has also been demonstrated in diabetes and may independently contribute to diabetic nephropathy and vascular disease [ ]. The pro-thrombotic state noted in long-standing diabetes is also partly related to both platelet dysfunction and coagulation pathway abnormalities, such as chronic elevation in fibrinogen and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) [ , , ]. The presence of DM is further associated with a pro-inflammatory state via upregulation of genes that promote release of inflammatory cytokines and promote expression of leukocyte-cell adhesion molecules [ ]. Such inflammation likely compounds lipid abnormalities in DM to promote atherosclerosis. Lastly, the co-morbid conditions that often accompany type 2 DM, such as obesity, insulin resistance, and hypertension compound and propagate atherosclerosis.
In response to these epidemiologic and pathophysiologic observations, guidelines have long advocated aggressive risk factor reduction in patients with diabetes, particularly those at highest risk. However, until recently, most of these recommendations were derived from broader studies of patients with cardiovascular disease. An exception was the STENO-2 study, which demonstrated a significant mortality benefit of a comprehensive intensive risk factor reduction strategy in patients with type 2 diabetes and microalbuminuria [ , ]. With treatment goals of achieving a glycated hemoglobin below 6.5%, a fasting serum total cholesterol level of less than 175 mg per deciliter, a fasting serum triglyceride level of less than 150 mg per deciliter, a blood pressure of less than 130/80 mmHg, and mandatory renin-angiotensin system blockers and low-dose aspirin, the intensified therapy group in this trial achieved a remarkable 20% absolute reduction in overall mortality, and 13% absolute reduction in cardiovascular mortality, in a mean follow-up of 13.3 years. In the recently published long-term follow-up results, patients in the intensive therapy group survived for a median of 7.9 years longer than the conventional therapy group [ ]. However, the STENO-2 trial included only 160 patients, which precluded analysis of individual risk factors. Subsequent studies and emerging therapies have begun to shed light on these pioneering results.
Management of Hyperglycemia
The reduction of hyperglycemia has been one of the cornerstones of management of diabetes for decades, and there are several classes of agents available (Table 2 ). Unfortunately, the benefit of glycemic control on macrovascular events has not been consistently observed. It has also been unclear whether it is the glycemic control or the specific agents utilized to achieve the glycemic control that mediate cardiovascular risk. This question was highlighted during the highly publicized controversy surrounding the anti-hyperglycemic thiazolidinedione (TZD) medication rosiglitazone, which was retrospectively associated with increased rates of myocardial infarction in a study by Nissen et al., and increased mortality in a study by Winkelmayer et al., despite a significant reduction in glycated hemoglobin (A1c) [ , , ]. The rosiglitazone controversy prompted greater attention to the cardiovascular risks and benefits of specific agents as well as the notion that a drug’s glycemic efficacy and cardiovascular risk are not necessarily related. Table 2 Approved antihyperglycemic medications discussed, listed by class Biguinides Metformin GLP-1 agonists Exenatide (Byetta, Bydureon) Liraglutide (Victoza) Albiglutide (Tanzeum) Dulaglutide (Trulicity) Lixisenatide (Lyxumia) Semaglutide a SGLT-2 inhibitors Dapagliflozin (Farxiga) Canagliflozin (Invokana, Sulisent) Empagliflozin (Jardiance) Thiazolidinediones Rosiglitazone (Avandia) Pioglitazone (Actos) DPP-4 inhibitors Sitagliptin (Januvia) Saxagliptan (Onglyza) Linagliptin (Tradjenta) Alogliptin (Takeda) a Not FDA approved
Glycated Hemoglobin Targets and Cardiovascular Risk
Although there is robust data that intensive glycemic control with a target hemoglobin A1c level below 6.5% leads to a significant reduction in diabetic microvascular complications, a similar association had not been as clearly established for macrovascular complications in older studies [ ]. The ACCORD trial was the largest prospective randomized trial designed to address this question. The trial assigned 10,251 diabetic patients with a mean hemoglobin A1c of 8.1% to intensive therapy (target below 6.0%) versus standard therapy (target 7.0–7.9%), while allowing providers to choose a comprehensive, customized therapeutic strategy [ ]. Of note, approximately 35% of patients in this study had established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. After a mean of 3.5 years, the intensive therapy group achieved a median A1c of 6.4% but had a relative increase in mortality of 22% and an absolute increase of 1.0%, compared to the standard therapy group, which achieved a median A1c of 7.5% [ ]. There was no significant difference between the two arms in the primary composite outcome of MI, stroke, or cardiovascular death. It was unclear whether the unexpected excess mortality was attributable to the level of hemoglobin A1c achieved or the agents used to do so. The ADVANCE trial was similar in design to ACCORD, randomizing over 11,000 type 2 diabetic patients to intensive control (defined as target A1c of 6.5% or less) or standard control, with a required use of a sulfonylurea agent [ ]. Although intensive control led to a significant 21% relative risk reduction and 1.9% absolute risk reduction in the combined endpoint of macrovascular and microvascular events at a median follow-up of 5 years, this outcome was driven mainly by reduced incidence of diabetic nephropathy, and notably, there was no significant reduction in cardiovascular endpoints or all-cause death alone [ ].
There remain some important limitations of these two practice-changing landmark trials. It should be noted that although only 19% of patients were on a TZD pre-randomization in ACCORD, 90% of the intensive therapy group subsequently received rosiglitazone (compared to 58% of standard therapy group) and a substantial proportion also received insulin, possibly contributing to the 3.5 kg mean weight gain in this group [ ]. It is unclear how this may have affected clinical outcomes, especially given the potential adverse cardiovascular effects of rosiglitazone. As could be expected, both ADVANCE and ACCORD noted severe hypoglycemia to occur significantly more frequently in the intensive group, but it is unclear the degree to which this affected mortality. In response to these trials, the 2016 American Diabetes Association guidelines continue to recommend a target glycated hemoglobin of below 7.0%, with the caveat that goals should be individualized based on duration of disease, presence of established cardiovascular disease and other co-morbidities, and risk of hypoglycemia [ ]. The guidelines go on to state that it may be reasonable to target lower hemoglobin A1c levels in younger patients with less risk for hypoglycemia in order to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events, while acknowledging that there is no strong data for such practice. Overall, though, the ACCORD and ADVANCE trials dampened enthusiasm for achieving glycemic control (as measured by A1c) for the purpose of reducing cardiovascular risk.
Cardiovascular Effects of Antihyperglycemic Agents
In contrast to studies of intensive glucose control that failed to show reduction in macrovascular complications, several recent studies suggest cardiovascular benefits for specific classes of diabetes medications independent of glycemic effect. This raises the possibility that hemoglobin A1c alone may be an insufficient metric for cardiovascular risk reduction. Possible cardiovascular benefit has been reported with the specific use of metformin, pioglitazone, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonists, and sodium glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors. In contrast, there is no consistent evidence for improved cardiovascular outcomes with sulfonylureas, meglitinides, alpha glucosidase inhibitors, or dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors, all of which are summarized in a recent review on non-insulin antihyperglycemic agents [ ]. The majority of the higher quality evidence also argues against a reduction in macrovascular complications with use of insulin, as previously summarized [ ].
Metformin
The biguanide metformin, which inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis and improves glucose utilization by peripheral tissues, reduces hemoglobin A1c and possibly cardiovascular events. Metformin has been shown to reduce mean hemoglobin A1c reduction by approximately 1.5% compared to placebo, and promote modest but sustained weight loss of over 2 kg on average in diabetic patients [ , ]. Older evidence also reported cardiovascular benefits of metformin. The UKPDS group prospectively studied metformin monotherapy versus placebo (conventional therapy group), as well as metformin therapy versus first-generation sulfonylureas or insulin therapy, in patients with both diabetes mellitus and obesity [ , ]. At a median follow-up of 10.7 years, the authors reported a significant 7.1% absolute reduction in all-cause mortality and a significant 6.4% absolute reduction in MI with metformin compared to conventional therapy, and a mortality risk reduction when compared to intensive therapy with sulfonylurea or insulin (without MI risk reduction) [ ]. Given a modest 342 patients in the metformin arm, the UKPDS study would not be considered robust by today’s standards and the results should be taken with caution. The UKPDS findings are bolstered by a more recent Cochrane systematic review, in which treatment with metformin demonstrated a significant reduction in all-cause mortality in obese patients, as defined by a body mass index over 30, when compared to sulfonylureas and insulin [ ]. However, there have been no recent randomized controlled trials to confirm the findings of UKPDS or this meta-analysis, nor to compare metformin directly to newer oral agents.
Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 (GLP-1) Agonists
Two relatively new classes of agents, the GLP-1 agonists and DPP-4 inhibitors are thought to work on the same physiologic incretin pathway, but with disparate cardiovascular benefits. GLP-1 is an incretin that acts as an insulinotropic hormone to modulate insulin secretion in response to glucose intake. As their name suggests, the DPP-4 inhibitors block the DPP-4 enzyme that normally degrades incretins, including GLP-1, whereas GLP-1 agonists directly activate the GLP-1 receptor [ ]. While the DPP-4 inhibitors have not been shown to reduce cardiovascular endpoints in randomized trials, there is emerging data suggesting cardiovascular benefit in the injectable GLP-1 agonists [ ].
In a recent meta-analysis by Shyangdan et al., the GLP-1 agonists as a class were shown to promote weight loss, with a reduction ranging approximately 1.4 to 2.6 kg over a follow-up of at least 8 weeks, when compared to placebo, insulin, or other oral agents such as DDP-4 agonists or thiazolidinediones [ ]. The FDA-approved GLP-1 agonists include exenatide, liraglutide, albiglutide, dulaglutide, and lixisenatide (the agent semaglutide is not yet approved). In addition to an average net reduction in weight, cardiovascular benefits have been observed thus far with liraglutide and semaglutide. The prospective randomized LEADER trial assigned 9340 patients with type 2 DM with A1c levels 7.0 or higher to either liraglutide or placebo as initial therapy, or as addition to existing antihyperglycemic therapy [ ]. Of note, patients in this trial were at high cardiovascular risk, defined by the investigators as either age greater than 50 with diagnosed atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease or symptomatic heart failure, or age greater than 60 with at least one cardiovascular risk factor. Although initially designed as a non-inferiority trial, at an interim analysis at median follow-up of 3.8 years, patients treated with liraglutide had a 1.9% absolute risk reduction in primary composite outcome of MI, stroke, or cardiovascular death (13.0 vs. 14.9%, hazard ratio 0.87; 95% CI 0.78 to 0.97; p = 0.01) [ ]. All-cause death was also significantly lower in the liraglutide group with an absolute risk reduction of 1.4%. Noted criticisms of this study include the higher mean glycated hemoglobin levels (8.7%) of participants, as well as the increased use of insulin and second-generation sulfonylureas in the control group, despite these agents being neutral for cardiovascular outcomes in prior studies [ , ].
Other trials of GLP-1 agonists have yield more mixed results. In the SUSTAIN-6 prospective trial, the not yet FDA-approved GLP-1 agonist semaglutide led to a significant 2.3% absolute risk reduction in the combined endpoint of cardiovascular death, non-fatal MI, and non-fatal stroke when compared to placebo at a median follow-up of 2.1 years, although without a significant reduction in cardiovascular death alone [ ]. The SUSTAIN-6 trial involved a particularly high-risk group of diabetic patients, with 83% having either established cardiovascular disease or chronic kidney disease. Those patients receiving semaglutide were noted to have significant reductions in glycated hemoglobin A1c, weight, and systolic blood pressure, which potentially could have contributed to the composite cardiovascular risk reduction. In contrast, the GLP-1 agonist lixisenatide in the ELIXA Trial failed to demonstrate a reduction in primary composite of cardiovascular death, MI, stroke, or unstable angina, when used in perhaps the highest-risk patients with type II DM with an acute coronary syndrome in the preceding 180 days [ ]. However, in light of the outcomes in the LEADER and SUSTAIN-6 trials, further randomized studies are necessary to assess whether cardiovascular risk reduction is unique to liraglutide and semaglutide, or a class effect of the GLP-1 agonists. It should also be noted that the cost of the GLP-1 agonists remains high and currently are available in injectable form only.
Sodium Glucose Cotransporter-2 (SGLT-2) Inhibitors
The SGLT-2 inhibitors are a newer class of antihyperglycemic agents that include three approved agents: dapagliflozin, canagliflozin, and empagliflozin. As a class, these agents inhibit the SGLT-2 glucose transporter in the proximal tubule of the nephron to promote renal glucose excretion, resulting in a relatively modest A1c reduction of 0.5–0.8% compared to placebo, and an A1c reduction comparable to active competitors such as metformin and DPP-4 inhibitors [ ]. It has been noted that the SGLT-2 inhibitors promote a reduction in systolic blood pressure and weight. In a recent meta-analysis, use of SGLT-2 inhibitors led to a mean reduction in systolic blood pressure of 4.45 mmHg and a mean reduction in weight of 1.80 kg, when compared to competitor agents [ ]. Furthermore, a recent randomized phase 3 study by Schernthaner et al., demonstrated a mean reduction in weight of 2.5% from baseline and mean reduction in systolic blood pressure of 5.1 mmHg with addition of canagliflozin to metformin plus sulfonylurea, versus addition of the DPP-4 agent sitagliptin that led to neither [ ].
Beyond reduction in glycated hemoglobin, weight, and blood pressure, there is also data to support the use of SGLT-2 inhibitors to improve cardiovascular outcomes in patients with diabetes. The prospective randomized 2015 EMPA-REG OUTCOME study assigned 7020 patients with type 2 DM to empagliflozin versus placebo, added to standard therapy [ ]. The empagliflozin group achieved a statistically significant hemoglobin A1c reduction of about 0.3% by the end of the study, and modest weight and systolic and diastolic blood pressure reductions when compared to placebo [ ]. More interestingly, at 3.1-year median follow-up, the group assigned to empagliflozin demonstrated a significant reduction in primary composite outcome of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke, with an absolute risk reduction of 1.6%, without significant reduction in the individual endpoints of MI or stroke [ ]. Furthermore, the authors reported a significant 1.8% absolute risk reduction in cardiovascular death and 2.6% absolute risk reduction in overall mortality in the group assigned to empagliflozin.
After EMPA-REG was published, it was unclear whether reduction in cardiovascular endpoints with empagliflozin was unique to this agent or a class effect of SGLT-2 inhibitors. A recent meta-analysis suggested that the reduction in cardiovascular endpoints may be a class effect, demonstrating a significant reduction in MACE, heart failure, and mortality as separate endpoints with a total of seven different SGLT-2 inhibitors in the USA, Europe, and Japan [ ]. The recently published randomized CANVAS study of canagliflozin for cardiovascular risk reduction further supports this notion although with more modest effects [ ]. Neal et al. incorporated data from two trials with 10,142 patients with type 2 diabetes with high cardiovascular risk, defined as age 30 or older with symptomatic ASCVD or age 50 or older with two additional cardiovascular risk factors. At 6.5 years, patients assigned to canagliflozin showed a significant reduction in the primary composite endpoint of cardiovascular death, non-fatal MI, and non-fatal stroke with a rate of 26.9 versus 31.5 events per 1000 patient-years (hazard ratio, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.75 to 0.97; p < 0.02 for superiority), although without a significant reduction in mortality alone as a secondary outcome. Of concern, canagliflozin use was associated with an increased risk of amputation (6.3 vs. 3.4 participants per 1000 patient-years; hazard ratio, 1.97; 95% CI, 1.41 to 2.75).
The findings of the SGLT-2 inhibitor trials have raised many questions and have prompted numerous ongoing trials. The mechanism by which the SGLT-2 inhibitors may reduce cardiovascular mortality is not yet understood, especially in light of the relatively short follow-up periods in the aforementioned studies. In addition to the aforementioned weight loss and antihypertensive effects, the SGLT-2 inhibitor class of agents appears to consistently reduce progression of albuminuria, reduce uric acid levels, and may also reduce arterial stiffness and visceral adiposity [ ]. For example, the group assigned to canagliflozin in CANVAS experienced a reduction in progression of albuminuria and a reduction in sustained decline in glomerular filtration rate or renal replacement therapy [ ]. Additionally, the SGLT2 inhibitors such as canagliflozin, led to a reduction in admissions for heart failure, which is compelling but remains to be prospectively studied as a primary outcome. Major studies are ongoing to further understand the role of SGLT-2 inhibitors in heart failure risk reduction.
Thiazolidinediones (TZDs)
The TZDs, specifically rosiglitazone and pioglitazone, bind the transcription factor peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-gamma) to facilitate insulin sensitization of peripheral tissues, and tend to lower mean hemoglobin A1c levels by slightly less than 1.5% and have been relegated to fourth or fifth line agents [ ]. Rosiglitazone is rarely used in current practice due to its aforementioned black box warning of an increased risk of MI and possibly an increase in cardiovascular mortality, based on mostly retrospective data [ , ]. Interestingly, the prospective randomized RECORD trial suggested rosiglitazone was non-inferior to a combination of metformin and sulfonylurea for a composite endpoint of cardiovascular hospitalization or cardiovascular death, and carried no increased risk of MI or stroke [ ]. There was a significantly increased risk of heart failure hospitalization or death with rosiglitazone, with a hazard ratio of 2.10 (CI 1.35–3.27) in this study. Many providers have moved away from prescribing this agent, however, in light of previous findings.
In contrast to rosiglitazone, pioglitazone has some evidence for cardiovascular benefit in patients with DM who do not have a history of congestive heart failure. The randomized PROactive Study assessed the effect of pioglitazone when added to standard diabetes regimens in 5238 diabetic patients with established macrovascular disease, the majority of which was atherosclerotic CAD [ ]. The authors reported a significant 2.0% absolute risk reduction in the composite secondary endpoint of all-cause mortality, non-fatal MI, and stroke in the pioglitazone group at a median follow-up of 2.9 years, despite only a mean reduction in hemoglobin A1c of 0.5%. However, authors also noted an increase in unadjusted heart failure hospitalizations without an increase in heart failure mortality [ ]. A more recent meta-analysis combined nine trials of pioglitazone, including PROactive, and reported a significant 2.4% absolute risk reduction of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) in patients with insulin resistance and 1.5% absolute risk reduction of MACE among patients with DM, again with a significant increase in heart failure events and edema [ ]. Lastly, the recently reported IRIS trial investigated the role of pioglitazone in patients with ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA) who had documented insulin resistance and a mean glycated hemoglobin of 5.8%, but not overt DM [ ]. After a mean follow-up of 4.8 years, the authors reported a significant 24% relative risk reduction and 2.8% absolute risk reduction in the primary composite outcome of fatal or non-fatal stroke or myocardial infarction, a reduced incidence of diabetes, and no difference in all-cause mortality [ ]. One important caveat in the use of pioglitazone is the consistent finding of increased incidence of clinical heart failure events, which precludes its regular use in diabetic patients with a history of congestive heart failure. It is possible that this risk is overestimated in some trials due to the confounding increase in non-heart failure peripheral edema noted with pioglitazone use.
Management of Dyslipidemia
The increased cardiovascular risk in patients with diabetes may at least in part lie within patterns of dyslipidemia and metabolic syndrome commonly seen in patients with this condition. Overall, patients with DM tend to have decreased concentrations of HDL-C, increased triglycerides, and elevated small dense LDL and very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) particles [ , ]. Although absolute LDL cholesterol concentrations are similar in diabetic patients and non-diabetic patients, LDL particles in the former tend to be smaller and denser and are more likely to contribute to accelerated atherogenesis [ ]. A full discussion of the pathogenesis of diabetic dyslipidemia is outside of the scope of this article but is concisely summarized in a recent review by Schofield et al. [ ]. Given these patterns of dyslipidemia, lipid management has become a central focus of cardiovascular risk reduction in patients with diabetes. The mainstay of treatment has traditionally been statin therapy, but the recently developed PCSK-9 inhibitors have the potential to play an important role in this arena.
Statins and Fibrates
Statins act as inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase (HMG-CoA reductase), which increases hepatic expression of cell-surface LDL receptors thereby reducing circulating LDL particles. Beyond alterations in cholesterol metabolism, there is some evidence for beneficial pleiotropic effects of statins, including anti-inflammatory properties, stabilization and shrinkage of atherosclerotic plaques, and improvement in endothelial dysfunction, which may in part underlie significant reductions in cardiovascular risk with their use [ ]. It is difficult to distinguish the degree of benefit arising from LDL reduction versus pleitropic effects, but emerging evidence for the cardiovascular benefit of PCSK-9 inhibitors, as discussed later, suggest the former certainly has an important role. Statins now are the core therapy for hyperlipidemia, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, acute coronary syndromes, and DM.
There have been numerous trials to demonstrate efficacy of statins for cardiovascular risk reduction in diabetic patients in particular. An older analysis of two prospective cardiovascular secondary prevention trials, CARE and LIPID, reported that among patients with CAD and LDL-C < 125 mg/dL, the addition of a moderate-intensity statin (pravastatin) led to a significant reduction in the composite primary endpoint of cardiovascular death, MI, or coronary revascularization [ ]. Interestingly, in this exploratory analysis, the reduction in coronary events was not demonstrated in the cohort without diabetes. Taking a slightly different approach, the multicenter randomized CARDS trial demonstrated the effectiveness of atorvastatin in patients with diabetes for primary prevention [ ]. CARDS randomized 2838 diabetic patients, aged 40–75 with LDL-C below 160 mg/dL (mean of 117 mg/dL) to atorvastatin 10 mg daily or placebo, and found a significant 3.2% absolute risk reduction in the primary endpoint of ACS, coronary revascularization, or stroke at a mean of 3.9 years of follow-up [ ]. There was a trend towards reduced all-cause mortality with an absolute risk reduction of 1.5% (relative risk reduction 27%, 95% confidence − 48 to 1%, p = 0.059) that did not reach statistical significance. It should be noted that the treatment arm achieved a 40% mean reduction in LDL-C levels, as would be expected with statin use. A landmark meta-analysis confirmed the benefit of statins in diabetic patients (including about 10% with type I diabetes) from a total of 14 randomized trials [ ]. At an overall median follow-up of 4.3 years, the authors observed a significant 9% proportional reduction (and approximately 1.2% absolute risk reduction) in all-cause mortality per mmol/L reduction in LDL-C, primarily driven by cardiovascular mortality, and irrespective of other co-morbidities. The authors also noted a 21% proportional reduction in major vascular events per mmol/L reduction. It should be noted that with the reported proportional reduction, the number needed to treat to prevent one major vascular event would be lower for those patients with higher LDL-C levels. Interestingly, the benefit in cardiovascular risk reduction in this meta-analysis was largely independent of the pretreatment concentrations of LDL cholesterol, as participants with LDL-C levels of 100 mg/dL or lower achieved similar benefit as those with higher LDL-C levels [ ].
The observation that patients with diabetes are at particularly high cardiovascular risk and seemingly benefit from statin therapy irrespectively of pre-treatment LDL-C level was in part responsible for the updated ACC/AHA Guidelines for Treatment of Blood Cholesterol, published in 2014 and more recently endorsed by the American Diabetes Association although with less emphasis on the ACC/AHA 10-year risk calculator [ ]. Unlike previous lipid treatment guidelines that involved pre-treatment cholesterol and specific targets for different populations (specifically below 100 mg/dL for those with diabetes and below 70 mg/dL with diabetes and CAD), the updated AHA/ACC guidelines recommended moderate-intensity statin for all type II diabetics age 40–75 (high-intensity for established ASCVD or a high 10-year risk of ASCVD over 7.5%), irrespective of pre-treatment LDL-C levels, and with the goal of achieving a 50% reduction in LDL-C levels. Although the ACC/AHA guidelines are likely to be updated in the near future, the principle of statin benefit in all diabetic patients without emphasis on pre-treatment LDL-C levels is important and reflects the consensus on the pleiotropic effect of these agents for risk reduction.
Fibrates have been studied in diabetic dyslipidemia, albeit to a lesser extent than statin therapy. They currently serve a role for treatment of significant hypertriglyceridemia, particularly when serum triglyceride levels exceed 500 mg/dL, with which can be seen on occasion in patients with diabetes. However, in a large randomized trial of 5518 patients in the ACCORD study, the addition of fenofibrate to simvastatin did not reduce cardiovascular outcomes [ ]. Study patients with diabetes were at elevated cardiac risk, either with clinical ASCVD (age 40 to 79) or with subclinical ASCVD or two or more additional cardiac risk factors (age 55 to 70), yet fibrate therapy did not lead to a reduction in the composite primary endpoint of non-fatal MI, non-fatal stroke, or cardiovascular death, nor in any secondary outcome, at a mean follow-up of 4.7 years. At this time fibrates cannot be routinely recommended for cardiovascular risk reduction in patients with diabetes in the absence of significant hypertriglyceridemia.
PCSK9 Inhibitors
More recently, an exciting new class of medications, the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitors, has emerged as treatment for hyperlipidemia (Table 3 ). The PCSK9 enzyme is normally expressed by hepatocytes and serves to degrade surface LDL receptors, thereby increasing LDL particles in circulation [ ]. The PCSK9 inhibitors are predominately monoclonal antibodies that destroy the PCSK9 enzyme, reducing PCSK9 enzyme concentrations significantly for 2 to 4 weeks, and thereby reducing serum LDL-C levels. Two agents to date, alirocumab and evolocumab, have been approved by the FDA for treatment of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia or atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Table 3 Approved PCSK-9 inhibitors, listed by class PCSK-9 inhibitors Alirocumab (Praluent) Evolocumab (Repatha)
Initial approval of the PCSK9 inhibitors was mainly based on trials establishing their efficacy for lowering LDL in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia and those not achieving this goal on statin therapy. The ODYSSEY LONG TERM Trial examined the effect of alirocumab on patients with LDL-C levels over 70 mg/dL despite maximum tolerated statin, and high cardiovascular risk, defined as heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, established CAD, or a CAD equivalent, with approximately 35% of patients having type II diabetes [ ]. The investigators demonstrated an average 62% reduction in serum LDL-C levels at 24 weeks ( p < 0.001), which was associated with an absolute risk reduction of 1.6% in the composite outcome of cardiovascular death, non-fatal MI, stroke, or unstable angina at 1.5 years (1.7 vs. 3.3%; hazard ratio, 0.52; 95% confidence interval 0.31 to 0.90; p = 0.02). The OSLER investigators reported comparable outcomes for evolocumab, with significant reductions in LDL-C levels on top of statin therapy, as well as a 1.1% absolute risk reduction in cardiovascular events at 1 year with pre-specified exploratory analysis [ ]. These trials suggested a role for these agents in patients with high cardiovascular risk, including DM, who failed to achieve LDL goal on statin therapy (now defined as 50% reduction in LDL levels by current ACC/AHA guidelines), or who are intolerant of statins.
Although the effect of the PCSK9 inhibitors on LDL-C levels is encouraging, there is now recent data identifying improved cardiovascular outcomes with these agents. In the FOURIER Trial, use of evolocumab in 27,564 patients with clinically evident atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and LDL-C over 70 mg/dL on maximum tolerated statin led to a significant 1.5% absolute risk reduction in the primary outcome (cardiovascular death, non-fatal MI, stroke, or hospitalization for unstable angina) when compared to placebo with a median follow-up period of 2.2 years [ ]. Of note, FOURIER demonstrated a 20% relative risk reduction and 1.5% absolute risk reduction in the more rigorous MACE secondary outcome of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke. Approximately 36% of patients in both study groups had diabetes mellitus. The medical community is eagerly awaiting outcomes from the similarly designed ODYSSEY OUTCOMES Trial for alirocumab ( ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT01663402). In addition to the potential salutary role of PCSK9 inhibitors in diabetic patients who are intolerant of moderate or high-intensity statins, these trials suggest there potentially may be a role for PCSK9 inhibitors for additive cardiovascular risk reduction on top of statin therapy in patients with diabetes. The continued high cost of these agents, however, needs to be balanced with the absolute cardiovascular risk reductions noted in FOURIER and elsewhere.
Management of Hypertension
Blood Pressure Targets and Cardiovascular Risk:
Hypertension has long been recognized as a risk factor for MI and stroke, including in patients with DM, who in particular have a high incidence of hypertension at the time of their DM diagnosis [ , ]. Although reduction in blood pressure, in addition to glycemic control, has been shown to reduce microvascular complications of nephropathy and retinopathy, the role of blood pressure reduction in decreasing macrovascular events in diabetic patients has been much less clear. The prospective UKPDS 36 observational study demonstrated a clear linear association between systolic blood pressure and the aggregate end point of diabetic complications, MI, stroke, and all-cause mortality in patients with DM [ ]. A 10 mmHg reduction in systolic blood pressure was associated with an average 12% reduction in MI, 19% reduction in stroke, and 12% reduction in heart failure, after adjustment for age, glycemic control, renal disease, and smoking status [ ]. This study was limited by its observational nature and the possibility of additional beneficial effects of individual antihypertensive agents, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, beyond their effect on systolic blood pressure reduction. The related UKPDS 38 prospective randomized trial for blood pressure control in 1148 patients with DM, with a median of 8.4 years follow-up, showed significant reduction in microvascular disease, stroke, and deaths related to diabetes, but only non-significant trends towards reduction in mortality and MI [ ]. The UKPDS 38 data was consistent with blood pressure studies in the general population [ , ]. The collective UKPDS data was partly responsible for the formation of the Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC 7) in 2003, which recommended a blood pressure target of 130/80 for patients with diabetes, lower than that recommended for the general population [ ].
More recent published data has shown varying benefit of aggressive blood pressure reduction in the general population, and those with diabetes in particular. The ACCORD-BP was a large prospective randomized trial for aggressive blood pressure reduction in 4733 patients with DM, in which the intensive therapy group achieved a mean systolic blood pressure of 119.3 mmHg, in comparison to 133.5 mmHg in the standard therapy group after a mean of 4.7 years of follow-up [ ]. Intensive blood pressure reduction in this trial failed to reduce the primary composite outcome of MI, stroke, or cardiovascular death, although it did reduce stroke as a secondary outcome [ ]. Although this trial brings into question the benefits of aggressive blood pressure reduction in diabetic patients, it should be noted that the control group had a remarkably low average systolic blood pressure at baseline, and an observed event rate that was nearly 50% lower than predicted [ ]. Thus, this study may have been underpowered to detect differences in outcomes. The ADVANCE blood pressure trial took a somewhat different approach than did ACCORD-BP, randomizing 11,140 patients with DM to either ACE inhibitor-diuretic combination (perindopril-indapamide) or placebo [ ]. Importantly 68% of study participants had treated hypertension, and both groups had an overall mean blood pressure of 145/81 mmHg. After 4.3 years of follow-up, the active group achieved a modest mean reduction in systolic blood pressure of 5.6 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure of 2.2 mmHg, and experienced a 1.3% absolute risk reduction in the primary outcome of microvascular or macrovascular events ( p = 0.04), but also a 1.2% absolute risk reduction in overall mortality and 1.2% absolute reduction in total coronary events, all of which were statistically significant [ ]. Interestingly, in an ADVANCE subgroup analysis, the study drug benefits were independent of baseline blood pressure, raising the question of whether the observed beneficial effects of ACE inhibitor-thiazide combination were due to absolute blood pressure reduction or due to the intrinsic effects of one or both drugs. Although the recently published SPRINT Trial demonstrated a significant reduction in primary composite cardiovascular outcome and mortality with intensive blood pressure control, this trial notably excluded patients with diabetes, and it remains unclear how to apply this data, if at all, to diabetic populations [ ]. The evidence for target blood pressure control in very elderly patients with DM is outside of the scope of this trial, but current JNC 8 guidelines suggest a target of 150/80 mmHg [ , ]. The preponderance of evidence suggests that blood pressure reduction does improve cardiovascular endpoints, with an appropriate goal systolic blood pressure target likely near 130 mmHg. While the JNC 8 guidelines recently relaxed blood pressure targets for diabetic patients to 140/90 mmHg, reflecting mainly the ACCORD-BP data, the current American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists/American College of Endocrinology (AACE/ACE) guidelines continue to recommend a blood pressure target closer to 130/80 in this population [ , ].
Use of Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors and Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARBs)
When considering hypertension management in diabetic patients, one must be careful not to overlook the benefits of ACE inhibitors and ARBs. The HOPE trial provided evidence for the use of ACE inhibitors in a high cardiac risk population, with either diabetes (38% of patients) or vascular disease [ ]. Study patients were age 55 or older, and 38% had DM. Despite a very modest reduction in mean blood pressure of 3 mmHg systolic and 2 mmHg diastolic, the group receiving the study drug ramipril had a significant relative risk reduction of 22% and absolute risk reduction of 3.8% for composite primary outcome of MI, stroke, or cardiovascular death, as well as a significant 1.8% absolute reduction in overall mortality alone [ ]. The significant cardiovascular and mortality reduction by ACE inhibitors and ARBs may in part be related to reduced progression of diabetic renal disease. In the Irbesartan Diabetic Nephropathy Trial (IDNT), 1715 patients with type II diabetes, hypertension, and nephropathy were randomly assigned to irbesartan, amlodipine, or placebo [ ]. At a mean follow-up of 2.6 years, use of irbesartan led to an absolute 8.5% reduction in the composite endpoint (doubling of serum creatinine, incidence of end stage renal disease, and mortality) when compared to amlodipine, independent of differences in blood pressure reduction [ , ]. A comparable 6.4% absolute risk reduction in the primary endpoint was noted with irbesartan compared to placebo. It should be noted, however, that this study did not demonstrate a reduction in all-cause mortality or cardiovascular death alone. Further evidence for the use of ARBs in diabetics comes from the LIFE trial of 1195 patients with diabetes, hypertension, and left ventricular hypertrophy by electrocardiograms [ ]. In this population, use of losartan led to a significant absolute 5.2% reduction in the composite endpoint of cardiovascular death, non-fatal MI, or non-fatal stroke at 4.7 years, when compared to atenolol [ ]. Of note, comparable blood pressure-lowering effects were noted in both the losartan and atenolol groups. Interestingly, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists such as spironolactone and eplerenone appear to also reduce proteinuria in diabetic nephropathy and may have an additive effect when used in combination with an ACE inhibitor or an ARB [ , ]. Whether or not this reduction in diabetic proteinuria translates into a reduction in cardiovascular endpoints remains to be seen in randomized trials and is a potential area of future research. Overall, the preponderance of evidence suggests that unless a strong contraindication exists, most patients with diabetes should be started on either an ACE inhibitor or ARB as initial anti-hypertensive therapy.
Conclusions
Diabetes affects an increasing number of people worldwide, and the disease carries a dramatically increased risk of cardiovascular events. Emerging therapies and management strategies have begun to demonstrate means to reduce this risk. Although aggressive hemoglobin A1c reduction in of itself has not been shown to reduce macrovascular complications, the use of metformin, pioglitazone (except in congestive heart failure), SGLT-2 inhibitors, and GLP-1 agonists may individually reduce cardiovascular risk. Statins have been the mainstay of lipid-lowering therapy among diabetic patients and other patients with elevated cardiac risk, with effects both secondary to LDL-C reduction and likely secondary to pleiotropic effects independent of this mechanism. Evidence is emerging that PCSK9 inhibitors reduce both LDL-C and cardiovascular events beyond maximum tolerated statin therapy among patients with prior cardiovascular events and LDL-C levels over 70 mg/dL, a substantial portion of which had diabetes in the FOURIER Trial. The benefit of these agents in diabetic patients specifically is likely to be an area of future study. Lastly, the majority of evidence suggests aggressive blood pressure lowering in patients with diabetes improves cardiovascular endpoints including MI and stroke, and the ideal target blood pressure is likely in the 130 mmHg systolic range, although the ideal target remains an area of study. A systolic blood pressure below 110 mmHg in a treated hypertensive patient with diabetes is not recommended and associated with cardiovascular harm.
In conclusion, recent therapies and strategies have begun to demonstrate promise in mitigating cardiovascular risk in patients with diabetes. The data outlined in this review should prompt a relook at approaches for primary and secondary prevention in this cohort, in addition to well-established strategies lifestyle modification and revascularization. It is hoped that future research will continue to shed light on new ways to improve cardiovascular health for this growing group of at-risk patients.