Introduction
Type 2 DM (T2DM) is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease [ , ]. There is no linear correlation between lowering glucose levels by medications and reduction in cardiovascular events. Moreover, there is a concern that intensive glucose-lowering treatment could increase the risk of adverse cardiovascular outcomes [ ]. In 2008, the FDA issued a “Guidance for Industry Diabetes Mellitus—Evaluating Cardiovascular Risk in New Antidiabetic Therapies to Treat Type 2 Diabetes” advisory ( http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm ). The guidance document recommends that new anti-diabetic agents should not be associated with increased cardiovascular risk. Also, since inflammation is thought to accelerate atherosclerosis in patients with T2DM [ ], interventions that reduce inflammation might have favorable effects in T2DM.
The NOD-like receptor 3 (Nlrp3) inflammasome is an interleukin-1β family cytokine-activating protein complex that plays an important role in the inflammation associated with T2DM [ , , , ]. Nlrp3 interaction with apoptosis-associated speck-like protein (ASC) leads to activation of caspase-1, and a subsequent increase in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [ , , ]. The Nlrp3 inflammasome is upregulated in the hearts of rats with T2DM and may contribute to the development of diabetic cardiomyopathy [ , , , , ]. Gene silencing of Nlrp3 reduces cardiac inflammation, pyroptosis, and fibrosis and improves cardiac function in rats with T2DM [ , ]. In the clinical setting, inhibition of Nlrp3 inflammasome offers considerable therapeutic promise [ ].
Inhibitors of the sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) reduce rates of hyperglycemia in patients with T2DM by decreasing renal glucose reabsorption, thereby increasing urinary glucose excretion [ , ]. A recent clinical study has shown that empagliflozin, a SGLT-2 inhibitor, reduced the primary composite outcome (cardiovascular mortality, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke) in patients with T2DM. In the trial, empagliflozin did not affect the rates of myocardial infarction or stroke, but reduced the rate of cardiovascular mortality, admission for heart failure, and all-cause mortality [ ].
SGLT2 inhibition reduces inflammation and attenuates the progression of diabetic nephropathy [ ]. Ipragliflozin reduced oxidative stress and expression of the markers of inflammation IL-6, TNFα, MCP-1, and CRP, and attenuated the progression of diabetic nephropathy in mice with T2DM induced by streptozotocin-nicotinamide [ , ]. A recent study suggested that empagliflozin attenuates inflammasome activation in the kidney and liver of male C57BL/6 mice fed high-fat-high-sugar diet [ ].
We [ ] and others [ ] have shown that dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP4) inhibition attenuates Nlrp3 inflammasome activation. We showed that DPP4 inhibition attenuated diabetes-induced Nlrp3 inflammasome activation in the kidney and adipose tissue, and the progression of diabetic nephropathy in mice with T2DM (DBDR), as well as type-1 diabetes (Akita) mice [ ].
SGLT2 inhibitors and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP4I) are used to treat T2DM. However, the effects of SGLT2 inhibitors treatment on the activation of the Nlrp3 inflammasome and the progression of diabetic cardiomyopathy in a T2DM model have not been reported. It has been suggested that the combination of SGLT2 inhibition and DPP4 inhibition could have additive favorable effects [ ].
We assessed whether the SGLT2 inhibitor, dapagliflozin (Dapa), attenuates the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and the progression of diabetic cardiomyopathy in mice with T2DM. We also tested whether the favorable effects are augmented by co-administration of saxagliptin (Saxa), a DPP4 inhibitor.
As we found that Dapa protects the heart, reduces activation of the inflammasome, attenuates fibrosis, and attenuates remodeling in the diabetic heart while it has been reported that SGLT2 is not expressed in the heart (at least in non-diabetic animals) [ , ], we conducted in vitro experiments to see if Dapa attenuated lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammasome activation in adult mice cardiofibroblasts to see whether these effects are independent from the glucose-lowering effect of Dapa.
Methods
Animal Model and Treatment
Male BTBR ob/ob mice {BTBR.Cg- Lep ob /WiscJ} and their wild-type control (WT: C57BL/6J) were purchased from Jackson Laboratory. Mice received humane care in compliance with “The Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” published by the National Institutes of Health (NIH Publication No. 85–23, revised 1996). The protocol was approved by the University of Texas Medical Branch IACUC. Mice at age of 8 weeks received: (1) WT+ vehicle; (2) WT+Dapa; (3) WT+Dapa+Saxa; (4) BTBR+vehicle; (5) BTBR+Dapa; (6) BTBR+Dapa+Saxa. Saxa (10 mg/kg/day) and Dapa (1 mg/kg/day) were mixed with food and administered for 8 weeks. After completion of treatment, body weight was measured and fasting glucose was determined using Glucose One Touch meter (Wako Diagnostics, Richmond, VA).
Echocardiography
Echocardiogram was performed using a fully digitized Vevo 770 high-resolution ultrasound system with a 25-MHz transducer-710B designed for the examination of small animals. Animals were anesthetized with ketamine-xylazine. Standard M-mode images will be taken in the long axis and short axis position at the level of the papillary muscles for each animal. Left ventricle internal diameters at end diastole (LVIDd) and systole (LVIDs), and left ventricular fractional shortening (FS) were measured. Ejection fraction was measured by a single-plane area length using 2D parasternal long axis images.
Glucose Tolerance Test
Intraperitoneal (i.p.) glucose tolerance test (IGTT) was carried out after 8 weeks treatment. Mice had fasted for 4 h prior to IGTT. Glucose (1 g/kg of body weight) was injected i.p. Blood samples were collected from tail vein before (0 min) and 30, 60, 90, and 120 min after the glucose administration. Blood glucose levels were determined using automated blood glucose meter and insulin levels were measured (see below).
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assays
Blood and plasma were collected using EDTA as an anticoagulant. Samples were centrifuge for 15 min at 1000× g at 2–8 °C within 30 min of collection. Insulin was determined using Ultra-sensitive Mouse insulin ELISA kit (Crystal Chem), triglycerides were examined using Triglycerides assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich), and CRP using Mouse C-Reactive Protein/CRP Quantikine ELISA Kit (R&D Systems).
Fibrosis
For the quantification of fibrosis, samples of left ventricular tissue from all groups were fixed and embedded in paraffin. Serial sections of 4 μm were stained with Masson’s trichrome. The cardiomyocytes were stained red and fibrosis stained blue. Fibrosis was quantified at a final magnification of ×400 with a microscope (Olympus DP71) connected to a video camera. Percent fibrosis area was analyzed using Image J analysis software, expressed as percentage of fibrosis area to the total area of each microscopic field. Eight microscopic fields of each sample were analyzed.
Apoptosis
Tissue sections from left the ventricle were fixed and embedded in paraffin, and apoptotic cells were detected by labeling DNA strand breaks using terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling (TUNEL) method. Apoptosis was visualized using an Apop Tag Peroxidase In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit (Millipore Sigma), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The total number of positive nuclei was determined by counting all the labeled nuclei present in the entire area. Ten areas were randomly selected. The apoptotic index was expressed as the ratio of positively stained nuclei to total nuclei. Images were obtained using Olympus IX71 microscope at a magnification of ×20.
Generation of Cardiofibroblasts
WT and BTBR mice were anesthetized with 5% isoflurane gas mixed with 95% O 2 . The hearts were harvested and cardiofibroblasts were isolated by Ca 2+ -free retrograde perfusion with Tyrode’s solution and enzymatic digestion using collagenase type 2.
In Vitro Experiments
1. Cardiofibroblasts were exposed to Dapa (0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5 μM) for 16 h, and then stimulated with LPS (10 ng/ml) for 3 h. Cardiofibroblasts not exposed to Dapa and LPS served as controls. Cells were harvest and RNA was prepared. For quantification, gene expression of NALP3, ASC, IL-1β, and caspase-1 was analyzed using real-time RT-PCR. 2. Cardiofibroblasts were isolated from WT mice. Cells were exposed for 16 h to Dapa (0.4 μM), AMPK activator [A769662 (10 μM), Sigma-Aldrich], AMPK inhibitor [compound C (CC),(10 μM), Sigma-Aldrich], an SGLT1+SGLT2 inhibitor [phlorizin (PZ), (100 μM), Sigma-Aldrich], Dapa+CC, or Dapa+PZ, and then stimulated with LPS (10 ng/ml) for 3 h. Control groups (without and with LPS stimulation) were cultured in 1% DMSO. The effects of Dapa on indicated proteins were assessed by western blot analysis.
Western Blots
Samples were homogenized in lysis buffer (in mM): 25 Tris·HCl (pH 7.4), 0.5 EDTA, 0.5 EGTA, 1 phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 dithiothreitol, 25 NaF, 1 Na3VO 4 , 1% Triton X-100, 2% SDS, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail. The lysate was centrifuged at 10,000× g for 15 min at 4 °C and supernatants were collected. Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method. Protein (50 μg) was fractionated by SDS-PAGE (4–20% polyacrylamide gels) and transferred to PVDF membranes (Millipore, Bedford, MA). After blocking, membranes were incubated with primary antibodies anti-TNFα, anti-ASC1, anti-caspase-1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-P-AMPK, anti-T-AMPK (Cell Signaling Technology), anti-NLRP3, or anti-β-actin (Sigma-Aldrich) overnight at 4 °C. The membranes were then washed and incubated with secondary HRP-conjugated antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Bound antibodies were detected using the chemiluminescent substrate (NEN Life Science Products, Boston, MA). The protein signals were quantified with an image-scanning densitometer, and the strength of each protein signal was normalized to the corresponding β-actin signal. Data are expressed as percent relative the expression in the control group (not exposed to LPS).
RT-PCR
Total RNA from isolated and heart tissue was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the protocol per manufacturer’s instruction. Total RNA (2 μg) from each sample was reverse-transcribed into cDNA and equal amounts of the reverse transcriptional products were subjected to PCR amplification. For quantification of mRNAs expressions, specific primers (Table 1 ) for TNFα, NLRP3, ASC, Caspase-1, IL1β, IL6, DPP-4, Collagen I&III, SGLT1, and SGLT2 were used. The Ct (threshold cycle) is defined as the number of cycles required for the fluorescence signal to exceed the detection threshold. Expression of the gene relative to the GAPDH was calculated as the difference between the threshold values of these two genes (2 -Δct ). Melting curve analysis was performed during real-time PCR to analyze and verify the specificity of the reaction. The values are given as the means ± S.E. of four independent experiments. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate and normalized by GAPDH. Table 1 Specific primers for quantification of mRNAs expressions Target mRNA Forward primer Reverse primer IL1β IL6 NALP3 ASC SGLT1 SGLT2 Caspase-1 TNFα DPP-4 Collagen I Collagen III GAPDH CCCTGCAGCTGGAGAGTGTGG TAGTCCTTCCTACCCCAATTTCC CATGTTGCCTGTTCTTCCAGAC CTCTGTATGGCAATGTGCTGAC CCACAAAGTGACCACTTCCA TCAGATTCTTTCCAGCCAGG AGTCCTGGAAATGTGCCATC ATCTACCTGGGAGGCGTCTT TTGTGGATAGCAAGCGAGTTG AAGAAGACATCCCTGAAGTCA TTGGGATGCAGCCACCTTG ATGATTCTACCCACGGCAAG TGTGCTCTGCTTGAGAGGTGCT TTGGTCCTTAGCCACTCCTTC CGGTTGGTGCTTAGACTTGAGA GAACAAGTTCTTGCAGGTCAG GTGGTACCGTTGGAGGCTT GCCTGACTCCTATCACCTGC TCAGCTCCATCAGCTGAAAC GAGTGGCACAAGGAACTGGT CACAGCTATTCCGCACTTGAA TTGTGGCAGATACAGATCAAG CGCAAAGGACAGATCCTGAG CTGGAAGATGGTGATGGGTT
Statistical Analysis: Data are presented as means ± standard error (SE). Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Sidak correction for multiple comparisons was applied to compare the different groups. The differences in glucose and insulin levels during glucose tolerance test were compared using two-way repeated measures ANOVA with Holm-Sidak multiple comparison procedures. Values of p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. In each figure, the p value of the ANOVA is shown along with symbols for the individual comparisons between specific groups.
Results
Dapa and Dapa+Saxa had no effect on fasting glucose levels in the WT mice. Dapa, and to a greater extent Dapa+Saxa, lowered fasting blood glucose in the BTBR mice (Fig. 1a ). Fasting blood insulin levels were not changed by Dapa or Dapa+Saxa in the WT mice. Fasting insulin levels were significantly higher in the BTBR mice than the WT mice. Dapa, and to a greater extent Dapa+Saxa, reduced fasting insulin levels (Fig. 1b ). Glucose (Fig. 1c ) and insulin (Fig. 1d ) levels during glucose tolerance tests were comparable between the WT-control, WT-Dapa, and WT-Dapa+Saxa groups. Glucose levels during the test were significantly higher in the BTBR-control group than the WT-control group. Dapa significantly reduced glucose levels during the test in the BTBR mice. In the BTBR mice, the effect of Dapa+Saxa was significantly greater than Dapa alone (Fig. 1c ). Insulin levels at the beginning of the glucose tolerance test were higher in the BTBR-control mice than in the WT-control mice. Yet, during the test (30, 60, and 120 min), insulin levels were lower in the BTBR-control mice than in the WT-control mice. Dapa, and to a greater extent Dapa+Saxa, increased blood insulin levels at 30,60 and 120 min (Fig. 1d ), suggesting improvement in glucose tolerance and increased insulin secretion. Fig. 1 a Fasting blood glucose. b Fasting serum insulin levels. c Blood glucose levels during glucose tolerance test. p < 0.001 for the time effect. p < 0.001 for the group × time interaction. d Plasma insulin levels during glucose tolerance test. p < 0.001 for the group effect. p < 0.001 for the time effect. p < 0.001 for the group × time interaction. e Fasting serum triglyceride levels. f Fasting serum CRP levels. There were six animals per group. * p < 0.002 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ p < 0.003 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa
Fasting serum triglyceride levels were unaltered by Dapa or Dapa+Saxa in the WT mice. Levels were significantly increased in the BTBR mice (Fig. 1e ). Both Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa reduced triglyceride levels in the BTBR mice, without a difference between the Dapa and the Dapa+Saxa groups. Serum CRP levels were higher in the BTBR-control than in the WT groups. Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa had no effect on serum CRP levels in the WT mice. CRP levels were lower in the BTBR-Dapa and the BTBR-Dapa+Saxa groups than in the BTBR-control group. The difference between the BTBR-Dapa and BTBR-Dapa+Saxa was not significant ( P = 0.057).
Echocardiogram showed that end diastolic volume (EDV) (Fig. 2a ), end systolic volume (ESV) (Fig. 2b ), and interventricular septal thickness in diastole (IVSd) (Fig. 2c ) and systole (IVSs) (Fig. 2d ) were significantly larger in the BTBR-control group than in the WT-control group. Dapa and Dapa+Saxa significantly attenuated the increase in these parameters in the BTBR mice. The magnitude of the effect of Dapa+Saxa on EDV and ESV was significantly greater than that of Dapa alone and approached WT levels. Fractional shortening (FS) (Fig. 2e ) and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (Fig. 2f ), on the other hand, were significantly lower in the BTBR-control group than in the WT-control group. Dapa alone, and to a greater extent Dapa+Saxa, significantly attenuated the decrease in FS and LVEF in the BTBR mice but did not reach WT levels. Of note, there was no difference in mean heart rate among the groups (Fig. 2g ). Fig. 2 a Left ventricular end diastolic volume ( EDV ). b Left ventricular end systolic volume ( ESV ). c Interventricular septal thickness in diastole ( IVSd ). d Interventricular septal thickness in systole ( IVSd ). e Fractional shortening of the left ventricle ( FS ). f Left ventricular ejection fraction ( LVEF ). g Heart rate ( HR ). There were eight animals in each group. * p < 0.002 vs. BTBR-control. † p < 0.037 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa
RT-PCR confirmed that SGLT2 is not expressed in the hearts of the WT and BTBR mice (data not shown). On the other hand, the expression of sodium–glucose cotransporter 1 (SGTL1) was increased in the hearts of the BTBR-control versus the WT-control group ( p < 0.001). Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa did not affect SGLT1 levels in the WT mice. Yet, Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa equally attenuated the increase in SGLT1 mRNA levels in the BTBR mice (Fig. 3a ). Fig. 3 Myocardial mRNA levels of SGLT1 ( a ), ASC ( b ), NALP3 ( c ), IL-1β ( d ), IL-6 ( e ), caspase-1 ( f ), and TNFα ( g ). Data are expressed as the ratio with WT-control group. There were four animals in each group. * p < 0.006 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa
Myocardial mRNA levels of ASC (Fig. 3b ), NALP3 (Fig. 3c ), IL-1β (Fig. 3d ), IL-6 (Fig. 3e ), caspase-1 (Fig. 3f ), and TNFα (Fig. 3g ) were significantly higher in the BTBR-control than in the WT-control group. Dapa and Dapa+Saxa significantly attenuated the increase in the BTBR mice. The effect of the Dapa+Saxa combination was significantly greater than that of Dapa alone only on TNFα levels and tended to be greater for all the other mediators. Dapa alone normalized mRNA levels of ASC, IL-1β, IL-6, and caspase-1 (compared to WT-control). Dapa+Saxa normalized also the mRNA levels of NALP3.
Likewise, myocardial mRNA levels of collagen-1 and collagen-3 levels were significantly higher in the BTBR-control than in the WT-control mice. Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa equally reduced the mRNA levels in the BTBR mice (Fig. 4a , b). Fibrosis, assessed by Masson’s trichrome staining, was increased in the BTBR-control compared to the WT-control group. Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa did not change the percentage of fibrosis in the WT mice (Fig. 4c ). Yet, both Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa reduce fibrosis in the BTBR mice. Fig. 4 a Myocardial mRNA levels of collagen-1. b Myocardial mRNA levels of collagen-3. Data are expressed as the ratio with WT-control group. There were four animals in each group. * P < 0.003 vs. WT-control. † P < 0.001 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ P < 0.001 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa. c Analysis of the percent myocardial is occupied by fibrosis. * P < 0.001 vs. WT-control. † P < 0.001 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ P < 0.001 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa. d Samples of Masson’s trichrome staining of the myocardium (final magnification ×10)
Tunnel staining shows that apoptosis significantly increased in the BTBR-control mice (Fig. 5 ). Dapa and Dapa+Saxa significantly attenuated apoptosis in the BTBR hearts, without an effect in the WT hearts. The effect of Dapa+Saxa was significantly greater than that of Dapa alone. Fig. 5 a Myocardial apoptosis (percent of Tunnel positive cells). There were 10 samples in each group. * p < 0.025 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.003 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa. b Samples of Tunnel staining of the myocardium
Immunoblotting confirmed that myocardial levels of NLRP3 (Fig. 6a , b), TNFα (Fig. 6a , c), and caspase-1 (Fig. 6a , d) were significantly elevated in the BTBR mice compared to the control mice. Dapa and Dapa+Saxa had no effect on the myocardial expression of NLRP3, TNFα, and caspase-1 in the WT mice, yet Dapa, and to a greater extent Dapa+Saxa, attenuated the increase in the BTBR mice. Dapa+Saxa completely normalized TNFα levels; however, levels of NLRP3 and caspase-1 were still significantly higher in the BTBR mice receiving Dapa+Saxa than the WT mice. Fig. 6 Samples of immunoblotting ( a ) and densitometric analysis of NLRP3 ( b ), TNFα ( c ), caspase-1 ( d ), and P-AMPK/total-AMPK ratio ( e ) of hearts. There were four animals in each group. * p < 0.001 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-Dapa
As it has been reported that SGLT2 inhibition leads to AMPK activation in the kidney [ ], we measured P-AMPK and total-AMPK in the heart. The P-AMPK/total-AMPK ration was significantly lower in the BTBR-control mice than in the WT mice. Dapa and Dapa+Saxa did not affect the ratio in the WT mice (Fig. 6a , e). Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa equally increased the ratio in the BTBR mice. Actually, the ratio was significantly higher in the BTBR-Dapa and BTBR-Dapa+Saxa hearts than in the WT hearts.
As we found a significant effect of Dapa on diabetes-induced activation of the inflammasome, fibrosis, and remodeling, despite the fact that SGLT2 is not expressed in the heart, we conducted in vitro experiments to assess whether Dapa had glucose-lowering- and SGLT2- independent effects using cardiofibroblasts generated from WT and BTBR mice after stimulation with LPS. We tested LPS concentrations of 0.1 to 1000 ng/ml and incubation times of 1–6 h. Based on the upregulation of the mRNA of NALP3 and IL-1β, we chose incubation with LPS 10 ng/ml for 3 h following pre-incubation with Dapa (0–0.5 μM) for 16 h. Despite being incubated in normoglycemic condition, NALP3, ASC, IL-1β, and caspase-1 levels were significantly higher in the BTBR cardiofibroblasts compared to the WT cardiofibroblasts after LPS simulation. Dapa at 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5 μM significantly attenuated the increase in both the WT and BTBR cardiomyocytes, suggesting a direct, glucose-lowering-independent effect (Fig. 7 ). Fig. 7 mRNA levels of NALP3, ASC, IL-1β, and caspase-1 in cardiofibroblasts preincubated with Dapa (0.0 to 0.5 μM) and stimulated with LPS (10 ng/ml). Experiment was repeated four times. * p < 0.022 vs. the Dapa 0.0 μM + LPS group
Next, we assessed whether Dapa affects AMPK activation and upregulation of the inflammasome in cardiofibroblasts stimulated with LPS. Furthermore, we assessed whether compound C, an AMPK inhibitor, would attenuate the inhibitory effects of Dapa on LPS-induced activation of the inflammasome and whether inhibition of the inflammasome in this model can be replicated with A769662, an AMPK activator. In addition, as the heart expresses SGLT1, but not SGLT2, we examined whether the inhibitory effects of Dapa on the activation of the inflammasome could be replicated with phlorizin, an SGLT1 and SGLT2 inhibitor. Furthermore, we compared the effects of phlorizin+Dapa combination versus Dapa alone and phlorizin alone (Fig. 8 ). LPS decreased P-AMPK/AMPK ratio. A769662 and Dapa equally increased AMPK phosphorylation. Compound C alone tended to cause further decrease in the P-AMPK/AMPK ratio; however, the difference compared to LPS alone was not significant. Compound C completely blocked the effect of Dapa ( P = 0.936 vs. LPS alone). On the other hand, phlorizin alone had no effect on AMPK phosphorylation and did not modify the effect of Dapa. As we have shown in the previous experiment, LPS increased protein levels of NLRP3, ASC, and caspase-1. Dapa attenuated the increase. The effect was dependent on AMPK activation, as A769662 alone attenuated the activation of the inflammasome and compound C blocked the effects of Dapa. Interestingly, phlorizin alone had no effect on LPS-induced inflammasome activation and did not alter the effects of Dapa, suggesting that the Dapa effects are not dependent on SGLT1 inhibition. Fig. 8 Samples of immunoblotting ( a ) and densitometric analysis of NLRP3 ( b ), TNFα ( c ), caspase-1 ( d ), P-AMPK/total-AMPK ratio ( e ), and total-AMPK ( f ) in cardiofibroblasts in vitro. Experiment was repeated four times. * p < 0.037 vs. Control without LPS. † p < 0.004 vs. Control+LPS. A769662 —an AMPK activator; CC —compound C, an AMPK inhibitor; LPS —lipopolysaccharide; PZ —phlorizin, an SGLT1 and SGLT2 inhibitor
Discussion
We found that Dapa attenuated the activation of the Nlrp3 inflammasome, upregulation of CRP, development of fibrosis and remodeling, and deterioration of left ventricular function in BTBR mice. The anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrosis effects are likely SGLT2-independent, as they were replicated in the in vitro model. The effects seem also to be glucose-lowering independent, as it was observed in vitro in cardiofibroblasts stimulated with LPS and incubated in normoglycemic condition. Moreover, some of the effects (EDV, ESV, FS, LVEF, TNFα, and apoptosis) were augmented when Saxa, a DPP4 inhibitor, was added to Dapa to levels present in WT mice, suggesting potential clinical significance for the combination. Yet, adding Saxa to Dapa did not result in a greater effect on collagen-1 and collagen-3 mRNA levels and on the extent of myocardial fibrosis, assessed by Masson’s trichrome staining.
A direct protective effect of SGLT2 inhibitors on the heart and other organs/cells besides the kidneys could explain the favorable effects of this class of drugs on cardiovascular outcomes in the clinical setting [ , ]. Although some experts tried to link the favorable effects on clinical outcomes solely to the diuretic effects of the drugs, others expressed doubts and suggested that other mechanisms may exist [ ]. The direct anti-inflammatory effect, specifically the suppression of the Nlrp3 inflammasome activation and subsequent amelioration of the development of diabetic cardiomyopathy, as demonstrated by the present study, provide mechanistic insight into the results of the EMPA-REG OUTCOMES trial, which showed that empagliflozin reduced all-cause mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and hospitalization for heart failure, without a significant effect on the rate of myocardial infarction [ ].
It has been reported that SGLT2 inhibition attenuates inflammation, including levels of CRP, IL-6, and TNFα, and the progression of diabetic nephropathy [ , , ]. A recent study suggested that empagliflozin attenuates Nlrp3 inflammasome activation in the kidney and liver of male C57BL/6 mice fed high-fat-high-sugar diet [ ]. However, the effects of SGLT2 inhibitors on the NLRP3 inflammasome (NALP3, ASC, caspase-1) in the diabetic heart have not been reported. Moreover, as SGLT2 is expressed in the kidney, but not in the heart or liver [ , ], similar effects of SGLT2 inhibitors on the heart could not be inferred. Here we show direct effects of Dapa on attenuation of diabetes-induced activation of the inflammasome, fibrosis, and remodeling in the heart in vivo and on mouse cardiofibroblasts in vitro.
The exact mechanism(s) for Dapa-induced attenuation of the Nlrp3 inflammation and fibrosis in the heart is not clear. The in vitro study showed that Dapa at concentrations of 0.3 to 0.5 μM attenuated the activation of the inflammasome by LPS. As SGLT2 is not expressed by the cardiofibroblasts, the protective effect is likely SGLT2-independent. Yet, the heart express SGLT1 [ , ], and the expression is higher in the hearts of BTBR mice than that of heart of WT mice. Trimenstein et al. reported that the half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) of Dapa for SGLT1 in the mouse is 0.3 ± 0.02 μM, a value that is much lower than the IC 50 in humans (1.4 ± 0.007 μM) [ ]. Thus, we tested whether the effect seen in the mouse cardiofibroblast can attributed to SGLT1 inhibition. The in vitro experiment clearly showed that phlorizin, a dual SGLT1 and SGLT2 inhibitor [ , , ], does not replicate the effect of Dapa and does not modify the effects of Dapa on AMPK phosphorylation and the attenuation of the inflammasome activation, suggesting that the effects of Dapa are not medicated via SGLT1 inhibition.
Dapa at 10 μM was found not to inhibit a panel of >330 enzymes, transporters, ion channels, and receptors in an in vitro assay [ ], suggesting that other mediators are unlikely to be involved in mediating the observed effects. Moreover, we used a much lower concentration (up to 0.5 μM) in our in vitro experiment. The Dapa concentrations that we used are comparable, or even lower than those reported in the literature [ , , ]. However, these concentrations are 30- to 600-fold higher than the Cmax of dapa concentration in human plasma at 5 mg dose, after correction of the unbound fraction [ , ]. Since we show that the Dapa effects are independent of SGLT1 inhibition, we cannot exclude the presence of other targets.
AMPK activation suppresses the upregulation of the inflammasome [ , ]. However, the effects of the various SGLT2 inhibitors on AMPK phosphorylation in renal cells are controversial. Chang et al. reported that Dapa at 1–10 μM did not affect AMPK phosphorylation in HK2 cells incubated in normoxemic or hypoxic condition [ ]. Hawley et al. (41) reported that canagliflozin activates AMPK by inhibiting mitochondrial function and increasing cellular AMP in the mouse liver, whereas Dapa and empagliflozin had a significant effect on AMPK phosphorylation at a concentration of 100 μM and only a small effect at 30 μM [ ]. Notably, the concentration of canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, and empagliflozin used in these studies are approximately 80,000-fold higher than the IC 50 values of these compounds in the SGLT2 transporter cellular assay. Here we found that Dapa significantly augmented AMPK phosphorylation in cardiofibroblasts stimulated with LPS. The concentration that we used (0.4 μM) is much lower than used by Chang and Hawley [ , ]. Our findings that phlorizin does not increase AMPK phosphorylation, though, are compatible with those of Hawley et al. [ ]. Here we report that the effect of Dapa on the LPS-induced inflammasome activation was completely blocked with compound C, an AMPK inhibitor, and these results could be replicated by A769662, an AMPK activator. Thus, we conclude that these anti-inflammatory effects are AMPK-dependent.
Three previous studies have reported that DPP4 inhibitors increase P-AMPK levels. Keller et al. reported that Saxa increases P-AMPK levels in the aorta of Goto-Kakizaki rats with T2DM who were subjected to exercise [ ]. Kornelius et al. reported that linagliptin increases AMPK phosphorylation in human neuronal cells [ ]. Ohyama et al. found that MK-0626 increases P-AMPK levels in the livers of ob/ob mice [ ]. In contrast, vildagliptin did not affect P-AMPK levels in hearts of OLETF rats with T2DM [ ]. Moreover, Lenski et al. reported that sitagliptin decreases P-AMPK levels in the myocardium of db/db mice, without an effect in non-diabetic mice [ ]. The fact that P-AMPK/ T-AMPK ratio was comparable between the Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa groups (Fig. 6 ) suggests that the Saxa effect is not mediated via AMPK.
Dapa has many additional effects in vivo that may modulate cardiac function including an increase in serum ketones [ ]. Dapagliflozin improved insulin sensitivity and caused a shift from glucose to lipid oxidation in patients with T2DM [ ]. Ferrannini et al. hypothesized that in vivo, SGLT-2 inhibition increases β-hydroxybutyrate levels that is used as a fuel by the heart, improving mitochondrial efficiency [ ]. Yet, in our in vitro experiment, we found a direct effect that could not be ascribed to hyperketonemia.
We have recently reported that Saxa attenuates the upregulation of the inflammasome in the kidneys and adipose tissues of mice with T2DM, as well as in Akita mice with type 1 diabetes, suggesting that this is a glucose-lowering-independent effect [ ]. Here we found that adding Saxa to Dapa significantly augmented the anti-remodeling effects, as measured by echocardiography (EDV, ESV, FS, LVEF) and further attenuated the diabetes-induced upregulation of TNFα and apoptosis. There was also a trend towards greater attenuation of the increase in the mRNA for ASC, NALP3, IL-1β, IL-6, and caspase-1; however, the differences did not reach statistical significance. In contrast, adding Saxa to Dapa did not result in a greater effect on collagen-1 and collagen-3 mRNA levels and on the extent of myocardial fibrosis, assessed by Masson’s trichrome staining. This could mean different effects of the combination therapy on Nlrp3 inflammasome activation and apoptosis versus on fibrosis. However, it is possible that a longer duration of therapy may have an effect on fibrosis.
Limitations
As mentioned above, Trimenstein et al. reported that the half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) of Dapa for SGLT1 in the mouse is 0.3 ± 0.02 μM, a value that is much lower than the IC 5 0 in humans (1.4 ± 0.007 μM), although the IC 50 for SGLT2 inhibition was comparable (1.12 ± 0.065 nM in humans and 2.3 ± 0.6 nM in the mouse) [ ]. We cannot exclude that these effects could not be replicated in human cardiac tissue. Moreover, we used Dapa at 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5 μM. These concentrations are lower than reported in previous studies [ , , ]; however, they are much higher than the IC 50 of Dapa for SGLT2 in the human kidney and much higher than the concentration of free drug achieved in the clinical setting with oral 5 mg dose (0.015 μM). Thus, it has to be shown whether these effects occur in the clinical setting.
In conclusion, we report a direct effect of Dapa on the attenuation of LPS-induced activation of the Nlrp3 inflammasome in cardiofibroblasts. This effect is likely SGLT-2- and SGLT-1-independent and is not secondary to glucose-lowering effects. These effects are likely mediated through AMPK activation. In vitro, Dapa attenuated myocardial inflammation, fibrosis, apoptosis, and diabetic remodeling. Saxa, a DPP4 inhibitor, was added to Dapa, attenuation of remodeling (assessed by echocardiography) and reduction in TNFα was significantly augmented, suggesting potential clinical significance for the combination.