Introduction
Left ventricular (LV) remodelling after myocardial infarction (MI) is a dynamic process characterized by an initial infarct expansion and consequent chamber dilation. During the acute phase (within days), substantial loss of working myocardium and regional wall expansion lead to acute pump failure or even LV free-wall rupture, a good index for acute remodelling [ , ]. While, chronically (over weeks to years) LV remodelling continuously progresses and eventually contributes to the development of chronic heart failure [ , ]. The degree of the initial insult to the myocardium significantly impacts the prognosis.
The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) is involved in a variety of cardiovascular pathologies including hypertension, atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease and heart failure. At the acute phase of MI, activation of the RAS is evidenced by a robust elevation in the level of angiotensin II (Ang II) and its receptor expression in both circulation and/or infarct tissues [ , , ]. Ang II has been shown to activate multiple intracellular signaling pathways by which it stimulates inflammation, oxidative stress, fibrogenesis, cell death and differentiation and regulates gene expression of a wide range of bioactive substances, ultimately leading to pathological cardiac remodeling [ ]. Ang II acts through type 1 (AT1) and type 2 (AT2) receptors. Both AT1 and AT2 receptors are ubiquitously expressed in the heart and AT1 mediates most of the pathophysiological actions of Ang II [ ]. Numerous experimental and clinical data indicate a pivotal role of the RAS in the setting of acute MI. Thus, the RAS has been the target of many therapeutic interventions.
Following cardioprotective benefits revealed by two early clinical trials, ISIS-4 [ ] and GISSI-3 [ ] admin-istration of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEi) or AT1 receptor blocker (ARB) has become the routine practice in MI management. Beneficial actions of RAS inhibition by ACEi or ARB include inhibition of myocardial fibrosis and hypertrophy, attenuation of chamber dilatation, reduction of recurrent MI events and incidence of heart failure, thereby preserving cardiac function and improving survival, which are independent, at least partly, of its vasodilatory action [ ].
Though inhibition of the RAS has been shown to have a broad range of cardioprotective effects after MI, the majority of studies have focused on long-term benefits [ , ]. The acute protective effect of RAS inhibition and underlying mechanisms are rarely investigated. Recent studies have revealed the role of the Ang II/AT1 axis in mediating post-MI inflammation [ , , ]. As systemic and regional inflammation, an endogenous innate immune response to ischemic insult, occurs in the acute phase and plays a pivotal role in myocardial injury, healing and remodelling post-MI, it is likely that inhibition of the RAS in the early phase of MI would yield protection in addition to the long-term benefits. Thus, we investigated the effect of ARB (losartan) and ACEi (perindopril) on acute post-infarct cardiac remodelling measured as cardiac rupture and underlying mechanisms in mice.
Materials and Methods
Animals and Induction of MI
Male 129sv mice, a strain with a high risk of post-MI cardiac rupture [ , ], at 10–12 weeks of age were used in this study. All experimental protocols were approved by a local Animal Ethics Committee and complied with the Australian Code for the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes (8th edition, 2013).
After being anesthetized with a mixture of ketamine, xylazine and atropine (KXA, 100, 20 and 1.2 mg kg −1 , respectively, i.p.), animals underwent left coronary artery occlusion to induce MI, and sham operation was also performed without occluding the coronary artery [ ].
Drug Treatment
Upon completion of surgery, animals were randomly assigned to six groups, (1) vehicle (saline) treated control; (2) losartan (ARB, Sigma) at 20 mg/kg; (3) losartan at 60 mg/kg, (4) perindopril (ACEi, Sigma) at 2 mg/kg, (5) perindopril at 6 mg/kg, and (6) amlodipine (Ca 2+ channel blocker, Sigma, as a blood pressure lowering agent for a comparison) at 20 mg/kg. Animals were given i.p. injection with 0.2 ml of saline or respective drugs dissolved in the same volume of saline immediately after completion of the surgery, followed by addition of drugs in drinking water. Based on the average mouse body weight of 30 g and averaged daily water consumption of 1.5 ml per mouse, concentrations of tested drugs were 0.04% and 0.12% for low-dose and high-dose losartan, 0.004% and 0.012% for low-dose and high-dose perindopril and 0.04% for amlodipine. The dosages of tested drugs were selected according to previous reports [ , , , ] and our pilot experiment with dose-dependent effect on blood pressure (data not shown).
Hemodynamics
Hemodynamics were determined using a 1.4 F Millar catheter in another batch of animals including sham-operated and MI mice at day-3 post surgery, as described previously [ ]. Heart rate, systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SBP, DBP), LV systolic pressure (LVSP) were recorded and analysed with Chart 5 Pro (V5.5.6) software (ADInstruments, USA).
Autopsy, Tissue Collection and Infarct Size Measurement
After surgery, mice were monitored for 2 weeks. Autopsy was performed in all mice that died to identify the cause of death such as cardiac rupture or heart failure, as described previously [ , ]. Infarct size was measured in all mice that either died of cardiac rupture or euthanized at the end of study. Infarct size was assessed by manually tracing the area of infarct section over the entire left ventricular endo-surface area from digital images of flattened LV and the fraction was calculated, as previously described [ ].
Haematological Examination
Animals were anesthetized by 2% isoflurane, 30 μl of blood was collected from the tail vein in mice subjected to sham operation or MI with or without losartan treatment. Haematological analysis was performed using Hemavet 950FS Blood Analyser (Drew Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instruction.
FACS
The spleen and infarcted myocardium were collected from another batch of mice at 24 h after MI. The spleen was crushed to separate cells in FACS buffer (1%BSA/HBSS), and then filtered through a 40 μm cell strainer. After centrifugation, cells were resuspended in red blood cell (RBC) lysis buffer (BD Biosciences) and then washed with PBS. The cell suspension from all samples were taken and made up with FACS buffer up to 200 μl. The cardiac tissue was digested with Liberase DH (Sigma Aldrich [Roche]) for 45mins at 37 °C and then was processed following the same protocol as outlined for the spleen. Cell number from cell suspensions of each tissue was measured using XS-1000i automated haematology analyser (Sysmex). Pacific Blue-conjugated CD45 (eBioscience), APC-conjugated Anti-CD115 (eBioscience) and PE-conjugated anti-Ly6-C/G (Gr1) (eBioscience) were used to identify neutrophils and monocytes in FACS analysis. Cells from each sample were incubated with the appropriate antibodies for 40 min at 4 °C to label the cells and then analysed via FACS. All FACS analysis was performed on BD LSRFortessa ™ X-20 and 800,000 total events per sample were collected. Cell analysis was performed using Flowjo (TreeStar). Cells were gated first based on size and granularity, using forward scatter-area vs. side scatter-area, to determine population of leukocytes and then gated based on single cell population to eliminate cell clumps. This was followed by gating of CD45 positive cells to gate for leukocytes only. The population of monocytes was identified as (CD45 + CD115 + ) and neutrophils were identified as (CD45 + CD115 − Ly-6C/G + ). Cell populations from the spleen were normalized to total number of WBCs in the spleen. Cell populations in the heart were presented as % of WBCs in the infarcted myocardium.
Quantitative Real Time-PCR
Total RNA was isolated from infarcted LV tissue with TRI Reagent® (Sigma). Gene expression of IL-1β, IL-6, MMP9, monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), IL-10, TNF-α and TGFβ1 was assessed by quantitative qPCR using Applied Biosystems 7500 fast real-time PCR system and normalised to 18 s, as previously described as previously described [ , ].
Immunohistochemistry
Fresh frozen LV sections at 5 μm thickness were used for immunohistochemical staining. Briefly, LV sections were incubated with primary antibody, rat anti-mouse CD45 (1:50, BD Biosciences), then followed by secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor® 546 goat anti-rat IgG (1:500 red florescence, Life Technologies). ProLong® Gold antifade reagent with nuclear acid dye, 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, blue fluorescence, Invitrogen) was added to each sample to stain for nuclei. For quantification of leukocytes, co-localisation of the two fluorescence colours turned to purple colour which indicated CD45 positive leukocytes. Images were acquired using an Olympus BX61 fluorescence microscope and leukocyte density analysed using Image Pro Plus software (Media Cybernetics, Inc) and expressed as average cell number per mm 2 , as we described previously [ , ]. The leukocyte density was measured from the infarct zone and the border zone and the analysis was conducted in a blind fashion.
Gelatin Zymography
Abundant and activity of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in the infarct myocardium were determined by gelatin zymography, as described previously [ , ]. Briefly, proteins were extracted and concentrations were determined using Bradford protein quantification assay. Equal amount of protein (50 μg) was loaded on a 7.5% acrylamide gel containing 0.5 mg/ml gelatin and electrophoresed at 4 °C. The densitometry levels were quantified using image analysis software (Quantity One; Bio-Rad).
Statistical Analysis
All data were expressed as mean ± SEM unless specified otherwise. Graphpad Prism (version 6) was used for analysis. Survival was analysed by Kaplan-Meier analysis and compared by the log-rank, Chi-square or Fisher exact test. One-way and two-way ANOVA were used for overall significance and was followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison post-hoc test. P < 0.05 was considered statistical significant. All data acquisition and analyses are in a blind fashion.
Results
RAS Inhibition Reduced Post-Infarct Cardiac Rupture
During 2 weeks after coronary artery occlusion, cardiac rupture occurred most frequently between 3 and 6 days following MI, which was consistent with previous reports [ ]. Incidence of cardiac rupture was 75% (27/36) in vehicle treated mice. Both losartan and perindopril treatments significantly reduced rupture incidence to 40–45% (losartan 10/22, perindopril 8/20) in low-dose and to 16–20% (losartan 5/32, perindopril 4/20) in high-dose groups (Fig. 1a ). Final survival was improved at 2 weeks in all treated groups (Fig. 1b ). The dose-dependent rupture-lowering efficacy was similar between the two drugs in tested dosages. Infarct size measured in animals that died of cardiac rupture or at the end of study was comparable among groups (vehicle 38.5 ± 2.0%, losartan 20 mg/kg 36.6 ± 1.8%, losartan 60 mg/kg 35.2 ± 1.3%, perindopril 2 mg/kg 35.0 ± 3.5%, perindopril 6 mg/kg 32.4 ± 2.0%, Fig. 1c ). Fig. 1 Treatment with losartan or perindopril immediately after MI reduced the incidence of cardiac rupture. a , Cumulative incidence of cardiac rupture in mice with different drug interventions. The numbers on the top of bars show rupture deaths out of total number of animals in each group shown. b , Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of mice with different drug treatments up to 2 weeks following MI. c , Infarct size of each group measured at autopsy in mice that died of cardiac rupture or in mice that survived to 2 weeks post MI. Veh, vehicle
Reduction of Cardiac Rupture by RAS Inhibition was Independent of its BP-Lowering Effect
To identify whether the BP-lowering effect would influence incidence of rupture, hemodynamic measurements were performed in mice 3 days after surgery, a time point just prior to the peak rupture occurrence. MI led to a modest reduction in BP and LVSP. Treatment with losartan or perindopril dose-dependently decreased SBP, DBP and LVSP in MI mice (Table 1 , all P < 0.05 , n = 7-8/group). Amlodipine at 20 mg/kg ( n = 8) reduced SBP, DBP and LVSP comparable to that by losartan or perindopril at the high-dose (Table 1 ). However, amlodipine treated mice had a similar rupture incidence (70% vs. 75% in vehicle group) with a comparable infarct size (34 ± 2%) as seen in vehicle treated group. Table 1 Influence of losartan, perindopril and amlodipine on hemodynamics in mice with myocardial infarction (MI) at day-3 post surgery n Heart rate beats/min SBP mmHg DBP mmHg LVSP mmHg Sham 5 395 ± 13 103 ± 3 77 ± 3 106 ± 4 MI, vehicle 10 386 ± 4 97 ± 2 73 ± 3 98 ± 2 MI, losartan 20 mg/kg 8 401 ± 15 92 ± 6 62 ± 5* 91 ± 5 MI, losartan 60 mg/kg 7 390 ± 23 78 ± 3*† 50 ± 2*† 81 ± 2*† MI, perindopril 2 mg/kg 7 389 ± 14 90 ± 2* 60 ± 1* 89 ± 4 MI, perindopril 6 mg/kg 8 410 ± 20 75 ± 3*† 48 ± 4* 78 ± 2*† MI, amlodipine 20 mg/kg 8 389 ± 11 77 ± 4* 50 ± 3* 76 ± 2* Results are mean ± SEM SBP systolic blood pressure, DBP diastolic blood pressure, LVSP left ventricular systolic pressure * P < 0.05 vs. vehicle treated MI group. † P < 0.05 vs. respective low-dose group
RAS Inhibition Suppressed Post-MI Systemic Inflammatory Response
As the high doses of losartan and perindopril exerted greater protection against cardiac rupture, in the rest of study we focused on the high dose only. Systemic inflammatory status was assessed by haematological examination in mice with or without receiving losartan (60 mg/kg) or perindopril (6 mg/kg) before (0 h, baseline) and 6, 24 and 48 h after MI. No significant differences were ob-served in baseline haematology parameters such as counts of white blood cells (WBC), neutrophils, lymphocytes and monocytes among all groups ( n = 6-7/group). Compared with baseline values, WBC level significantly increased at 6 h and 48 h post-MI (both P < 0 .05), whereas at 24 h, WBC level only slightly increased (Fig. 2a ). Treatment with losartan or perindopril similarly reduced WBC number at 24 and 48 h versus vehicle treated animals at both time points (all P < 0.05 ). MI induced a 3.6-fold increase in neutrophils 6 h post-MI and levels gradually decreased at 24 h (2.8-fold) and 48 h (2.1-fold) when compared with baseline values (Fig. 2b ). Treatment with losartan or perindopril significantly decreased neutrophil count at 24 h MI (Fig. 2b ). Lymphocyte count decreased at 6 h and 24 h post-MI in all groups, whereas it increased significantly at 48 h (40%) in the vehicle treated group (Fig. 2c ). Losartan and perindopril abolished the increase of lymphocytes at 48 h post MI. Monocyte count was increased at 6 h compared with baseline values, while both losartan and perindopril interventions did not affect monocyte count post-MI (Fig. 2d ). Fig. 2 Haematological profile of mice treated with vehicle (saline), losartan (60 mg kg −1 ) or perindopril (6 mg kg −1 ) within 48 h after MI. Counts of white blood cells ( a ), neutrophils ( b ), lymphocytes ( c ) and monocytes ( d ) before MI (baseline) and 6, 24 and 48 h post MI. n = 6–9/group. * P < 0.05 vs. respective baseline group. † P < 0.05 vs. vehicle treated MI group at the same time point
Inhibition of the RAS Attenuated Splenic Release of Monocytes and Neutrophils
Next, we determined changes in monocyte and neutrophil population in the spleen and the heart to investigate whether AT1 blockade or ACE inhibition prevented splenic monocyte and neutrophil release at 24 h following MI. In both spleen and infarcted myocardium, monocytes were identified as CD115 positive cells and neutrophils were identified as CD115 negative and Gr-1 positive cells using FACS in MI mice that had received losartan at 60 mg/kg, perindopril at 6 mg or vehicle (saline). Normal (unoperated) animals served as control ( n = 5-6/group). Compared to normal control mice, MI in the vehicle treated group led to a 47% and 37% reduction in monocyte and neutrophil populations, respectively, at 24 h post-MI (both P < 0.05 , Fig. 3a ). Treatment with losartan or perindopril restored MI-induced reduction in splenic monocyte and neutrophil populations with more neutrophils retained (63% more than normal control levels) in the spleen by perindopril treatment (Fig. 3a ). In the normal heart, the percentage of both monocytes and neutrophils was negligible, while the monocyte and neutrophil populations increased dramatically in the infarcted myocardium at 24 h after MI and the neutrophil population was nearly 40-fold higher than the monocyte population (Fig. 3b ). Although infiltrated monocytes were much less at this time point, high dose losartan (60 mg/kg) still significantly reduced monocyte population by 57% versus the level of the vehicle group. Perindopril, howev-er, had no such effect (Fig. 3b ). Both losartan and perindopril treatments effectively reduced the neutrophil population by 39% and 24%, respectively, in the infarcted myocardium at 24 h post-MI (Fig. 3b ). These results imp-licated that inhibition of the RAS by either losartan or perindopril inhibited splenic release of monocytes and neutrophils following MI. Fig. 3 Effect of losartan or perindopril treatment on monocyte and neutrophil populations in the spleen and heart at 24 h post MI. a, Representative scatter plots from the spleen of normal (unopereated), vehicle (saline), losartan (60 mg kg −1 , L-60 mg) and perindopril (6 mg kg −1 , P-6 mg) treated mice after MI showing the changes of monocyte and neutrophil populations. MI induced a significant reduction in splenic monocyte (CD115 + ) and neutrophil (CD115 − Ly6C/G + ) populations, and losartan or perindopril treatment retained these cells in the spleen to a level comparable to their normal values (without surgery). b, Representative scatter plots from the infarcted myocardium of different groups showing the changes of monocyte (upper rectangle) and neutrophil populations (lower rectangle). MI markedly increased monocyte and neutrophil populations in the heart. Both losartan and perindopril treatments attenuated neutrophil population, only losartan decreased monocyte population in the heart. n = 5-6/group. * P < 0.05
Inhibition of the RAS Attenuated Leukocyte Infiltration into the Infarct Region
Immunohistochemical staining for CD45 positive leukocytes in the heart was performed at 48 h post-MI. Compared to sham controls ( n = 6), there was a marked leukocyte infiltration in the infarct myocardium ( n = 10). Treatment with losartan ( n = 10) or perindopril ( n = 7) for 48 h similarly decreased leukocyte density by 34% versus vehicle treated mice ( P < 0.05 , Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 Influence of losartan and perindopril on inflammatory cell infiltration in the infarcted myocardium at 48 h post MI. Overlaying (purple colour) of CD45 positive cells (red colour) and blue stain nuclei (by DAPI) was indicated as CD45 positive leukocytes. Leukocyte density in the infarct region was marked increased, which was equally diminished by losartan (60 mg kg −1 ) or perindopril (6 mg kg −1 ) treatment. n = 6–10/group. * P < 0.05 vs. sham, † P < 0.05 vs. vehicle treated MI group
Inhibition of the RAS Downregulated Expression of pro-Inflammatory Genes
We next investigated the effect of losartan or perindopril on the expression of inflammatory and fibrotic related genes in the infarcted myocardium at 48 h post MI. As shown in Fig. 5 , expression of selected genes in the infarcted myocardium were markedly upregulated versus corresponding sham control values ( n = 5) post-MI. Compared to the vehicle treated MI group, both losartan (60 mg/kg) and perindopril (6 mg/kg) significantly decreased expressions of IL-1β, IL-6, and MMP9 (by approximately 40–50%, all P < 0.05 , Fig. 5a, b , n = 6–8/group). While losartan did not affect the expression of MCP-1, TNF-α and TGF-β1, perindopril broadly suppressed the expression of these inflammatory and fibrotic genes when compared to vehicle treated mice at this time point (Fig. 5a, b ). In addition, both losartan and perindopril treated hearts had a further increased expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine, IL-10, over the vehicle treated value (by 53–67%) with a significant difference observed in the perindopril treated group (Fig. 5a, b ). Fig. 5 Effect of losartan and perindopril treatments on expression of inflammatory and fibrotic related genes at 48 h post MI. Administration of losartan (60 mg kg −1 , a ) or perindopril (6 mg kg −1 , b ) for 48 h reduced MI-induced elevation in mRNA levels of IL-1β, IL-6 and MMP9 with a broad inhibitory effects on expression of MCP-1, TNF-α and TGFβ1 by perindopril. Both treatments further increased expression of IL-10, an anti-inflammatory cytokine. n = 5-6/group. * P < 0.05 vs. sham, † P < 0.05 vs. vehicle treated MI group
Inhibition of RAS Diminished MMPs Activation
Activation of MMP2 and MMP9 plays a central role in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodelling following MI [ ]. We chose to examine the influence of drug interventions on the activation of MMP2 and MMP9 at 3 days after MI, a time point with a peak local inflammation and onset of rupture. Consistent with our previous reports, MI was associated with increased activities of MMP2 and MMP9, evidenced by a markedly elevated active form of MMP2 (66-fold vs. sham) and MMP9 (13-fold vs. sham, Fig. 6 ). Losartan treatment attenuated MMP9 activity by 29% ( P < 0.05 ), but had no influence on MMP2 activity (Fig. 6a , n = 4-5/group). Interestingly, perindopril decreased both MMP2 (by 66%) and MMP9 (by 42%) activities when compared to vehicle control levels (both P < 0.05 , Fig. 6b , n = 4-5/group). Fig. 6 Influence of losartan and perindopril treatments on activities of MMP9 and MMP2 in the infarcted myocardium by zymography. At day-3 post MI, abundance and activities of MMP9 and MMP2 markedly increased. Losartan inhibited MMP9 activity but had no effect on MMP2 activity ( a ), while perindopril effectively inhibited activities of both MMP9 and MMP2 ( b ). n = 4-5/group. * P < 0.05 vs. sham, † P < 0.05 vs. vehicle treated MI group
Discussion
The present study examined the influence of RAS inhibition on inflammatory response and cardiac remodelling at the acute phase of MI. We have made three major findings. First , administration of losartan or perindopril reduced the incidence of post-MI cardiac rupture in a dose-dependent manner, an effect that was independent of their BP-lowering action. Second , ARB and ACEi suppressed the acute inflammatory response post-MI systemically and regionally, measured as circulating inflammatory cells, monocyte release from the spleen, regional leukocyte infiltration, and expression of pro-inflammatory mediators. Third , both ARB and ACEi attenuated MMP2 and/or MMP9 activities. Thus, RAS inhibition reduces early adverse cardiac remodeling post-MI by suppressing acute inflammatory responses.
Following MI, the infarct wall undergoes acute remodeling (infarct expansion) and cardiac rupture is an extreme form of such acute remodeling where the infarcted wall is unable to maintain structural integrity [ ]. Although the incidence of post-infarct cardiac rupture has been significantly reduced to approximately 2% compared to 6–7% in pre-reperfusion era [ , ], pharmaceutical intervention targeting RAS is effective in attenuating remodeling post-MI. However, the survival benefits of such therapies are mainly attributable to attenuation of chronic remodeling with better preservation of cardiac function [ ]. Actions of this class of drugs during the acute phase of MI are undetermined. Experimentally, rupture incidence is a gold endpoint for the severity of acute infarct remodelling [ ]. In the present study, we investigated the effect of either ARB or ACEi in 129sv mice, a strain with a high risk of cardiac rupture post-MI [ , ], and found that both losartan and perindopril successfully reduced rupture death and improved survival at 2 weeks after MI. This protective effect was dose-dependent for both drugs. To our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate cardioprotection by RAS inhibition with ARB and ACEi measured as cardiac rupture post MI.
Several factors are associated with the risk of post-MI cardiac rupture, including 1) the severity of initial insult; 2) hemodynamics; and 3) progression of tissue damage, which is mediated by the inflammatory process [ ]. In our study, the initial insult was matched among groups as shown by the comparable infarct size. We observed a dose-dependent reduction in SBP, DBP and LVSP by treatment with losartan or perindopril in mice after MI. As both losartan and perindopril have BP-lowering actions, this hemodynamic factor could potentially reduce post-MI rupture. Indeed, clinical studies indicated that high SBP at admission was associated with increased risk of cardiac rupture [ , , , ]. For example, one early clinical study reported that out of 4369 patients with acute MI, rupture incidence was 0.3% in patients with normal SBP (110–129 mmHg) while incidence increased to 2.0% in those with high SBP (170–189 mmHg) [ ]. To investigate whether the BP-lowering effect exerted by these drugs [ ] contributes to the reduced incidence of rupture, we treated mice with amlodipine, a Ca 2+ channel blocker, which reduced BP and LVSP to a similar level as high dose losartan or perindopril, but did not change cardiac rupture rate despite a similar infarct size among these different groups. This finding suggests that losartan and perindopril protect the heart against infarct expansion and rupture by a mechanism independent to the BP-lowering action.
It is recognised that inflammation and consequent ECM damage are central to the pathogenesis of cardiac rupture [ ]. Appropriate inflammatory response post-MI is critical for fibrotic healing. However, excessive regional inflammation will further damage the jeopardised myocardium by promoting additional cell death and interfering with the healing process, which eventually leads to adverse remodeling and heart failure [ ]. Studies in animal MI models and MI patients have shown a close association between the severity of inflammation and cardiac rupture [ , , ]. High counts of WBC and monocytes at admission in MI patients are associated with poor survival rate, indicating the significance of systemic inflammation in disease progression and prognosis post-MI [ , ]. Our previous study in mice targeting on post-MI inflammation showed that antiplatelet intervention not only reduced rupture rate acutely but also mitigated long-term cardiac dilatation [ ]. In the present study, we observed a rapid systemic inflammatory response following MI. Haematological tests showed that counts of WBC, neutrophil, and monocytes increased as early as 6 h post MI. Treatment with losartan or perindopril significantly reduced peak counts of these parameters compared with vehicle treated counterparts. Furthermore, the amplitude of early elevation of neutrophil count was very high, which supported the current knowledge that neutrophils are the first class of leukocytes to reach a peak level in the circulation and also within the infarct myocardium [ , ]. In contrast, lymphocytes were increased only at 48 h post-MI. A recent study reported that CD4 + T cells were activated at day-7 following MI and infiltrated into the infarct region, possibly facilitating wound healing [ ].
As aforementioned, neutrophils are the first recruited leukocytes population in response to regional ischemic injury, which is generally believed as detrimental [ , ]. Monocytes/macrophages are also activated within hours following MI and are the second leukocyte population infiltrating into the infarct myocardium following neutrophils and play an important role in phagocytosis of necrotic cells during inflammation as well as the activation of the healing process [ ]. The spleen has been known as an important reservoir of monocytes (>50%) out of the bone marrow in the body and hence contributes significantly to regional monocyte infiltration after MI [ , , ]. Recently, following identification of splenic neutrophils which can stimulate immunoglobulin diversification and secretion by B cells in the spleen [ ], a number of studies have shown an influence of splenic neutrophils in ischemic hearts. Tian et al. reported that hyperglycemia enhanced splenic neutrophil release with resultant peripheral neutrophilia and increased myocardial neutrophil infiltration during reperfusion [ ]. Kain et al. found that treatment of a pro-inflammation resolving lipid mediator, RvD1, increased splenic neutrophil density at day-1 post-MI which was associated with reduced fibrosis and delayed onset of heart failure [ ]. Currently, most studies have used immunohistochemistry to investigate neutrophil changes in the setting of ischemic heart disease. In the present study, using FACS, we observed a significant reduction in the populations of splenic monocytes and neutrophils at 24 h after MI, indicating that splenic release was blocked by treatment with ARB and ACEi, and that the ACEi perindopril was more efficient. This was associated with significantly decreased WBC and neutrophil counting in peripheral blood by both drug treatments compared to vehicle control values. Conversely, in the heart, acute ischemic injury induced dramatic inflammatory cell infiltration (including monocytes and neutrophils) with the neutrophil as the predominant inflammatory cell population at 24 h post-MI. Both losartan and perindopril significantly attenuated cardiac neutrophil population, and only the ARB losartan reduced cardiac monocyte population. This novel finding advances our knowledge of the role of splenic neutrophils in exacerbating ischemic myocardial injury. Supportively, Leuschner et al., using an in vitro cell migration system, also showed that losartan prevented Ang II induced monocyte motility [ ]. The same group also found that MI triggered AT1 receptor dimerization in splenic monocytes, which could be inhibited by enalapril, thereby reducing splenic monocyte motility post-MI [ ]. Taking together, these findings indicate that splenic monocyte and neutrophil release is a RAS dependent process and the mobilization of splenic monocytes and neutrophils requires Ang II/AT1 signalling [ ].
Following blockade of splenic monocyte and neutrophil release, MI-induced leukocyte infiltration into the infarct region at 48 h post-MI was also equally diminished by losartan and perindopril treatment. Downregulation of inflammatory gene expression was observed by treatments of both losartan and perindopril, with broader inhibitory effects on the expression of inflammatory and fibrotic genes by perindopril. In addition, both drugs also increased IL-10 expression, which may mediate anti-inflammation, anti-apoptotic and anti-oxidative stress actions [ , , ]. Besides the direct inhibition of leukocyte recruitment, ACE inhibition may also attenuate the local angiotensin system. Inhibition of the local angiotensin system mitigates subsequent inflammatory response such as production of reactive oxygen species and up-regulation of inflammatory gene expression [ ]. Numerous studies including ours have documented a pivotal role of activation of MMPs, particularly MMP2 and MMP9, in degradation of ECM and subsequent adverse remodelling post MI including cardiac rupture [ ]. We and others showed that circulating and regional inflammatory cells are the major cellular source of MMPs, particularly MMP9 [ , , ]. Here, we observed diminished activities of MMP2 and/or MMP9 by losartan and perindopril treatments. This may be the underlying mechanism by which RAS inhibition alleviates ECM degradation with a reduced risk of cardiac rupture. Interestingly, perindopril seems to be more efficient than losartan in inhibiting MMP activities. A possible explanation for this is that ACE and MMPs share a similar molecular structure with a zinc-dependent endopeptidase and ACEi, but not ARB, can chelate directly to the zinc active center of both MMP2 and MMP9 thereby inhibiting their activities [ , , ]. In the clinical setting, ACEi treatment exerts more potent cardiovascular protection than ARB in patients with MI [ ]. Thus, RAS inhibition by ARB and ACEi targeting on Ang II/AT1 signaling exerts anti-inflammatory effects following MI. This action together with direct inhibition of MMP activities, contribute to cardiac protection by preventing ECM degradation, which would influence the extent of cardiac remodeling in the long term.
In conclusion, our study demonstrates that RAS inhibition by ARB or ACEi inhibited monocyte and neutrophil release from the spleen and consequently reduced regional inflammatory cell infiltration and down-regulated inflammatory gene expression, which together with inhibition of MMP activities protected the heart against post-infarct rupture.