Introduction
Myocardial ischaemia, irrespective of the severity of underlying coronary artery disease, is a process whereby part or all of the myocardium exhibits reversible impairment of oxygen uptake, with resultant limitation of a number of processes of aerobic cellular metabolism [ , , ]. A central aspect of ischaemia is the coincident appearance or aggravation of disturbed myocardial relaxation, that is, diastolic heart failure: this in turn may result in further compromise of coronary blood flow, resulting in a “vicious cycle” of further reduction in oxygen delivery, particularly to the subendocardium [ ].
In recent years, it has become practicable to monitor the process of ATP generation, largely within cardiac mitochondria, and the activity of the creatine kinase pathways, which facilitate the transfer of ATP to the cytoplasm via the production of phosphocreatine. Investigations of cardiac energetic status of this type, typically utilizing 31 P-magnetic resonance spectroscopy, have demonstrated that in both myocardial ischaemia and also heart failure associated with congestive or hypertrophic cardiomyopathies, there is a fall in phosphocreatine to ATP ratios [ , , ]. The data indicate an overlap in the myocardial metabolic consequences of ischaemia (for example due to coronary stenosis and increased cardiac workload) and various forms of heart failure, and suggest reciprocal relationships between heart failure and ischaemia are possible [ ]. Indeed, it is common for conditions such as aortic valve stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy to present with ischaemic-type chest pain, despite the absence of large vessel coronary stenosis.
If myocardial ischaemia is fundamentally linked with the development of energetic impairment, it is important to understand exactly how such energetic impairment may be produced. In fact, the heart is able to generate ATP, largely within the mitochondria, primarily via metabolism of either glucose or fatty acids. Conversely, the development of deficiency of high energy phosphates results from extensive failure of interlinked generation pathways.
Cardiac Metabolic Pathways: Reciprocity of Glucose and Fatty Acid Utilization: Randle Cycle
Approximately 70 % of ATP generation by the myocardium results from oxidation of fatty acids (under fasting conditions), but there are a large number of modulating mechanisms which control the process of tissue uptake, which are potentially subject to considerable variability [ ]. Importantly, extent of fatty acid oxidation may be modulated both acutely and chronically.
Fatty acid uptake into the heart is initiated via a number of fatty acid binding proteins and a fatty acid translocase (CD 36), and is facilitated by the actions of lipoprotein lipases in releasing fatty acids from triglycerides. The transfer of long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs) across mitochondrial membranes utilizes the “carnitine shuttle”, whereby LCFAs are conjugated with carnitine on the outer mitochondrial membrane via the enzyme carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1 (CPT-1) [ ]. The resultant acylcarnitine derivatives cross the mitochondrial membrane and are deconjugated from carnitine on the inner mitochondrial membrane by CPT-2 (see Fig. 1 ). Activity of CPT-1 represents the rate-limiting step in LCFA metabolism: once traversing the mitochondrial membrane, the LCFA undergoes β-oxidation within the mitochondrion: the latter process generates acetyl CoA, which enters the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and thus contributes to cellular ATP production [ ]. Fig. 1 The reciprocal regulation between glucose and fatty acid metabolism – Randle cycle. Abbreviations: GLUT = glucose transporter; HK = hexokinase; PFK-1 = phosphofructose kinase-1; OMM = outer mitochondrial membrane; IMM = inner mitochondrial membrane; PDH = pyruvate dehydrogenase; ETC = electron transport chain; ACC = acetyl-coA carboxylase; MCD = malonyl-CoA decarboxylase; LCFA = long-chain fatty acid; FABP = fatty acid binding protein; CPT-1/2 = carnitine palmitoyl transferase-1 (or 2)
There are a number of important modulating factors relevant to rates of LCFA metabolism. First, acetyl-CoA generated in the process of LCFA metabolism is partially converted to malonyl-CoA (by the enzyme acetyl-CoA carboxylase). Malonyl-CoA is a potent inhibitor of CPT-1 (Fig. 1 ), but accumulation of malonyl-CoA is usually limited by malonyl-CoA decarboxylase, which catalyses breakdown of malonyl-CoA [ , ]. Second, a number of other ligands and enzymes modify the expression of genes involved in fatty acid metabolism. For example, the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha (PGC-1α) alters expression of several genes involved in fatty acid metabolism [ ]. Furthermore, both sirtuin 1 and adenosine monophosphate kinase (AMPK) function as energy sensors, with the ability to modulate fatty acid metabolism [ , ] (see Fig. 2 ). Thus even in isolation the control of fatty acid metabolism is complex, and potentially subject to pharmacological modulation at several points. Fig. 2 Sirtuin-1 (SIRT-1) functions as an “energy sensor”. Through deacetylation of post-translational proteins, SIRT-1 increases PGC-1α activity and the expression of insulin receptor substates, both of which eventually modify fatty acid or glucose metabolism, and lead to increased ATP production. Abbreviation: IRS = insulin receptor substrate
Critically, glucose utilization is also subject to a number of physiological controls, although in the fasting state this accounts for only 10–30 % of myocardial ATP generation [ ]. The uptake of glucose into the myocardial cytoplasm is partially insulin-dependent: in the cytoplasm glucose is converted to pyruvate (Fig. 1 ), which undergoes active transport into the mitochondria to enter the TCA cycle. A critical role is played by pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), an enzyme complex located within mitochondrial membranes, which represents the rate-limiting step in glucose utilization. A major inhibitor of PDH activity is acetyl CoA, which is generated from LCFA metabolism [ ]. Conversely, increased activity of the TCA cycle as a result of extensive glucose utilization results in cytoplasmic accumulation of citrate, and eventually increased malonyl CoA production, inhibiting CPT-1.
In 1963, Randle et al. proposed what has come to be called the Randle Cycle [ ]: a reciprocity of utilization of long-chain fatty acids and of glucose by the heart. It has emerged that the key controls of this reciprocity are the activities of CPT-1 and PDH, together with generation of the relevant endogenous inhibitors malonyl CoA and acetyl CoA.
β-oxidation of fatty acids and glucose utilization via the TCA cycle represent the two major sources of ATP generation within mitochondria [ ]. Glucose utilization carries a small (approximately 13 %) advantage in terms of ATP generation per unit oxygen consumption. In addition, smaller quantities of ATP may be generated within the cytoplasm under anaerobic conditions via glycolysis, a process which is accelerated when PDH is inhibited by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 under hypoxic conditions [ ].
Other Modulation of Myocardial Energetics: Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Energetic Depletion
Production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), within mitochondria in particular, increases under a number of pathological conditions, including anoxia and hyperglycaemia [ ]. This may lead to dysfunction of the mitochondrial membrane and of the mitochondrial electron transport chain, with an associated further increase in ROS production [ ].
During stressful conditions, the excessively generated superoxide will react with nitric oxide to form peroxynitrite [ ]. Peroxynitrite triggers DNA single strand breakage and subsequent activation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). Once activated, PARP cleaves NAD + into nicotinamide and ADP-ribose, a process that depletes NAD + and consumes ATP. Therefore, overactivation of PARP has been shown to not only deplete its substrate NAD + , but also slow the rate of glycolysis, reduce ATP formation and cause eventual cell death [ ]. In animal models, PARP-1 knock-out was associated, surprisingly, with enhanced energy expenditure, together with increased glucose clearance, but also protection against diabetes while maintaining normal pancreatic insulin content and islet cell morphology [ ].
Potential Targets for Therapeutic Modulation of Myocardial Metabolism
A large number of strategies have been proposed to increase generation of ATP in disorders of cardiac energetics, as summarized in Table 1 . Table 1 Categories of proposed therapeutic strategies to accelerate myocardial ATP generation in the presence of ischaemia and/or other energetic impairment 1. Increased substrate utilization • Glucose-insulin-potassium (GIK) • Dichloroacetate: Pyruvate dehydrogenase activation 2. CPT-1 inhibition • Perhexiline • Amiodarone •? Trimetazidine • Etomoxir • Oxfenicine 3. Partial fatty acid oxidation inhibitors • Trimetazidine • Ranolazine 4. Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase inhibitors 5. Coenzyme Q10
Among the various strategies for which data are available indicating beneficial effects on myocardial energetics are infusion of glucose and insulin together with potassium (GIK), which in theory increases availability of glucose for myocardial metabolism. However, clinical data on this type of strategy are inconsistent: perhaps the most encouraging finding is of stabilization of haemodynamics during valve replacement surgery for aortic stenosis [ ].
Inhibition of CPT-1 represents a component of the anti-ischaemic effects of perhexiline and amiodarone. However, excessive or irreversible CPT-1 inhibition tends to cause tissue accumulation of lipoprotein deposits, including the development of apparent myocardial hypertrophy with oxfenicine [ ] and etomoxir [ , , ].
Partial fatty acid oxidation inhibiton, via the enzyme long-chain 3 ketoacyl-CoA-thiolase, is probably the main action of trimetazidine [ ], and a component of the effects of ranolazine [ ]. The net effect is a reduction in LCFA metabolism:- indeed recent studies have suggested that trimetazidine may have similar efficacy in heart failure to that of perhexiline [ ]. Comparisons between CPT-1 and partial fatty acid oxidation inhibition have not yet been reported.
To date, no clinical studies of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase inhibitor therapy have been reported, but in theory their effects should be similar to those of CPT-1 inhibitors. Coenzyme Q10, an important factor in mitochondrial respiration, was recently reported to exert beneficial effects on outcomes in patients with chronic heart failure [ ].
Perhexiline
(1) Studies of anti-anginal efficiency: Initial experience
Perhexiline was developed by Richardson-Merrell Pharmaceuticals (Cincinnatti, Ohio, USA) in the 1960s as a prophylactic anti-anginal. Early animal studies suggested that the antianginal properties of perhexiline may have arisen on the basis that it exerted systemic and coronary vasodilator effects, increased coronary arterial and venous blood flow, slowed the heart rate and increased pulmonary vascular compliance [ , ]. Perhexiline was subsequently marketed essentially outside the USA in the 1970s, both as monotherapy [ , ] and also later as incremental therapy beyond β-adrenoceptor antagonists [ ], typically in doses between 200 to 400 mg daily. It is important to recognize that perhexiline was released for general clinical use in many countries despite little understanding at that time of its mechanisms of action, pharmacokinetics in humans and potential toxicity. As an example of the level of understanding, the drug was thought to be unsafe in the presence of renal disease, but in fact that is not the case [ ]. (2) Experience regarding toxicity
In the 1970s, reports of hepatotoxicity and peripheral neuropathy associated with long-term use of perhexiline emerged [ , , , ]. These adverse effects were poorly understood at that time, apart from the fact that the toxicity was associated with phospholipid deposition in hepatocytes and Schwann cells [ , , ], but soon led to the global gradual withdrawal of the drug during the 1980s, except in Australia and New Zealand. However, several observations during the late 1970s and early 1980s paved the way to better understanding of the role that pharmacokinetics and pharmacogenetics of perhexiline play in its potential toxic effects.
First, Singlas et al. (1978) observed that plasma concentrations of perhexiline were elevated in patients with long-term therapy who experienced hepatotoxicity and neuropathy compared to unaffected individuals [ ]. It was also noted that there was a large interindividual variation in the apparent plasma half-life of perhexiline, and therefore that perhexiline-induced toxicity was secondary to some inborn metabolic variability which increased individuals’ susceptibility to drug accumulation [ , ]. Shah et al. (1982) later noticed that a genetic mutation in the metabolism of debrisoquine and perhexiline led to impaired metabolism and potential toxicity [ ]. Together with these findings, Horowitz et al. (1986) demonstrated that the metabolism of perhexiline in unselected individuals with angina was non-linear (or “saturable”), and established that maintenance of concentrations of perhexiline at steady-state between 0.15 to 0.6 mg/L was effective in avoiding clinically overt toxicity [ ]. The achievement of therapeutic drug concentrations corresponds to daily perhexiline dosage ranging from approximately 10 mg for poor metabolizers through to 500 mg for ultra-rapid metabolizers [ ].
It is now known that cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP 2D6) plays a major role in the metabolism of perhexiline, and that monitoring the concentration ratio between hydroxyperhexiline and perhexiline provides an indication of patients’ metabolic capacity and need for further dosage adjustment [ ]. Through continual research to better understand the cellular mechanisms of the drug and careful plasma drug concentration monitoring, perhexiline is now regarded as potentially conferring great benefits to patients with refractory angina [ ] but also to other cardiovascular disease states (see below). It has been re-registered in several European countries, due to favourable clinical trials and has also very recently been projected as a treatment for symptomatic non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (3) How does perhexiline work?
The initial postulate that perhexiline was essentially a coronary vasodilator was rapidly replaced by the idea that it might be an L-type calcium antagonist [ , ]. However, this was a relatively weak effect [ ]. In 1980, Vaughan Williams first proposed that perhexiline’s mechanisms of action might be based upon changes in myocardial metabolism improving efficiency of energy generation, but did not specify the specific changes involved [ ]. Jeffrey et al. (1995) also provided evidence that perhexiline might increase efficiency of myocardial oxygen utilization, consistent with the presence of such an effect [ ]. In 1996, over 20 years after perhexiline had first been utilized clinically, it was found to be a potent inhibitor of the carnitine shuttle [ ]. Inhibition of CPT-1 [ ], and to a lesser extent CPT-2 [ ] would result in secondary activation of glucose utilization via increased activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (the “Randle cycle”) [ ]. Like oxfenicine, which was initially introduced primarily for the treatment of diabetes, perhexiline exerts moderate hypoglycaemic effects [ ], potentially mediated by insulin sensitization.
However, perhexiline clearly exerts effects beyond CPT-1/CPT-2 inhibition. In 2005, Unger and colleagues found that in isolated non-ischaemic working rat hearts, pre-treatment with perhexiline increased cardiac efficiency by about 30 %. However this was independent of changes in palmitate oxidation [ ]. It remains quite possible that effects other than CPT-1 inhibition contribute to the therapeutic efficacy of perhexiline.
Indeed, perhexiline was subsequently found to inhibit pre-assembled neutrophil NADPH oxidase [ ], which is responsible for the inflammatory process known as the “neutrophil burst”. This anti-inflammatory effect of perhexiline could contribute to the related finding of potentiation of platelet responsiveness to nitric oxide by perhexiline when platelet aggregation was evaluated in whole blood [ ].
Finally, in a recent study, perhexiline was found to activate Kruppel-like factor 14 and increase high density lipoprotein in animal models of atherosclerosis [ ]. This finding raises the potential for an anti-atherogenic effect of perhexiline, which has not yet been evaluated formally. (4) Integration of clinical experience with pharmacokinetics: Recent experience
Since the introduction of routine therapeutic drug monitoring of perhexiline, several clinical studies have provided evidence that perhexiline conferred significant clinical improvement with minimal risk of adverse effects. In 1990, Cole et al. first consolidated the effectiveness of therapeutic drug monitoring of perhexiline, demonstrating that in patients with otherwise refractory angina unsuitable for coronary revascularization, perhexiline treatment substantially improved anginal symptoms [ ].
Perhexiline has also been shown to be useful in the management of patients with unstable angina pectoris, with resolution of symptoms correlating with attainment of therapeutic drug levels [ ]. As regards long-term safety of the drug, a recent audit of 170 patients treated for a median period of 50 months revealed no hepatotoxicity and only 3 cases of peripheral neuropathy [ ].
Given that perhexiline’s therapeutic effects are independent of changes in coronary vasomotor tone, a number of studies have recently investigated its possible therapeutic effects in conditions associated with impaired myocardial energetics (with or without angina) but in the absence of underlying severe coronary disease-related ischaemia. An initial report on symptomatic response in elderly patients with aortic stenosis [ ] has not been followed up with controlled data. However, Lee et al. demonstrated in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial that perhexiline was markedly beneficial in chronic systolic heart failure, irrespective of the presence or absence of associated coronary disease [ ]. This has led to widespread use of the drug in this context, particularly in patients with limitations to alternative pharmacotherapy, such as those with severe renal insufficiency [ ]. Finally, Abozguia et al., in an elegant double-blind study showed that perhexiline improved symptomatic status in patients with non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, with concomitant improvement both in left ventricular relaxation, maximal oxygen consumption and myocardial energetics [ ].
Conclusions and Future Directions
In summary, perhexiline is now established as a relatively safe treatment for myocardial ischaemia and other cardiac conditions associated with impaired cardiac energetics. On the other hand, it is a relatively difficult drug to use, requiring individual dose titration on the basis of plasma level monitoring. Efforts are currently being made to develop derivatives of perhexiline with more predictable pharmacokinetics in order to facilitate more widespread utilization of the drug.