Introduction
Angina pectoris is the most common clinical manifestation of ischemic heart disease. [ , ] The primary aim in the choice of pharmacological and non-pharmacological approaches for the treatment of angina should be to improve prognosis. Management options for the treatment of chronic stable angina include lifestyle modifications and medical therapy. Anti-platelets, lipid-lowering therapy and ACE-inhibitors have been shown to reduce the risk of death and non-fatal MI in both primary and secondary prevention trials. All anti-anginals improve exercise tolerance and symptoms in patients with ischemic heart disease but none of them, including beta-bockers, has been shown to improve prognosis in patients with chronic stable angina. [ , ].
Although it has been implied that the effect of beta-blockers in reducing cardiac events in post-infarction patients with left ventricular dysfunction was mirrored by a similar beneficial effect also in patients with chronic stable angina, recent evidence suggests that this is not the case. Therefore, there is no evidence to suggest a prognostic benefit for beta-blockers in patients without a recent myocardial infarction and left ventricular dysfunction.
In treating patients with chronic stable angina it must be taken into account that ischemic heart disease is a haemodynamic and metabolic disease in which the reduction, either acute or chronic, of myocardial blood supply induces metabolic changes that affect cardiac contractility, relaxation and ultimately cardiac cell survival. [ ] The metabolic changes associated with ischemic heart disease have been well characterized in the past decades. The reduction of oxygen delivery to the myocardium results in metabolic changes that lead to a reduction in the formation of high energy phosphates via aerobic mechanisms that in turn results in reduction of cardiac functions, accumulation of lactate and H + and altered function of the late Na current of cardiac myocytes [ ].
The improvement of mechanical revascularization approaches in the past decades has been paralleled by an increasing success of conventional medical therapeutic approaches and all studies conducted in patients with chronic stable angina have shown a similar prognostic effect of medical and interventional therapies. However, the two approaches cannot be regarded as alternative but rather as complementary as many patients undergoing percutaneous procedures are discharged with medical therapy or have to be prescribed anti-anginals. A sizeable proportion of patients undergoing percutaneous coronary interventions or coronary artery bypass surgery does not achieve complete revascularization, and continue to experience residual anginal symptoms despite maximal medical therapy. [ ].
Ranolazine is the latest anti-anginal drug approved for the treatment of angina pectoris that blocks the increase of the late sodium current during ischemia. This molecule does not influence heart rate nor blood pressure and has, along with its anti-anginal effect, additional electrophysiological properties due to its downstream effect on myocardial sodium and calcium overload.
Pharmacology and Pharmacokinetics
Ranolazine is a racemic mixture that consists of a 1:1 ratio of (R) and (S) enantiomers at the secondary alcohol that originates from the secondary carbon of the epoxide ring in guaiacol glycidyl ether (GGE/Ran 3). It is formulated as a prolonged release matrix tablet and the drug has high solubility in acidic medium and low solubility in basic medium. The prolonged release formulation has been developed by using a pH-dependent polymer that is insoluble in low pH but starts dissolving at around pH 5 or higher. The mechanism of action of ranolazine on the late myocardial sodium currents (lNa) is well established and it has been demonstrated that it could improve myocardial ischaemia and protect the myocardium, both in vitro and in animal models. Also, several metabolites of ranolazine have been proven to have a relevant pharmacodynamic effect. The most abundant metabolite in man is CVT-2514 (RS 88390) and CVT 2738 (RS 94287), which inhibit late INa at least as strongly as the mother substance.
The bioavailability after oral administration of slow release tablets of ranolazine ranges from 35 to 50 %, peak plasma concentrations are reached two to five hours after oral administration and half-life is 7 h. The rate or extent of absorption of ranolazine are not affected by food and steady state is achieved within three days of twice-daily dosing. [ ] Ranolazine is metabolised in the liver mainly by CYP3A4 and CYP2D6, 65 % of the drug is bound to plasma proteins and less than 5 % is excreted unchanged. Concurrent use of CYP3A4 inhibitor drugs or substances leads to an increase in ranolazine exposure depending on the potency of the inhibitor. Ranolazine inhibits simvastatin transport and increases the plasma concentrations of simvastatin; this effect could be due to CYP3A4 inhibition or P-gp inhibition. Ranolazine pharmacokinetic is not affected in mild hepatic impairment whereas the Area Under the Curve (AUC 0–12 ) of ranolazine may increase with different severities of liver dysfunction.
Ranolazine is well tolerated with rarely undesirable effects the most common of which are constipation, nausea and asthenia. Ranolazine may induce a small dose-related increase in QTc. However, in the clinical development programme of ranolazine there has been no evidence of an increased risk of torsades de pointes. [ , , , , , , , , , , , , ] Furthermore, in the MERLIN-TIMI 36 study a significantly lower incidence of arrhythmias including ventricular tachycardia was detected in patients treated with ranolazine compared to patients receiving placebo. [ ].
Co-administration of ranolazine with Class Ia (such as quinidine) or Class III (such as dofetilide and sotalol) antiarrhythmics is contraindicated. Since ranolazine is metabolised through CYP3A4 drug to drug interactions must be considered when the drug is co-administered with substances inhibited or metabolised through this enzyme. Ranolazine increases plasma concentrations of simvastatin but this effect is small. Caution should be taken in combining ranolazine with moderately potent CYP3A4 inhibitors including diltiazem and erythromycin.
Mechanism of Action
The mechanism of action of ranolazine is due to its effect on the inhibition of sodium entry into myocardial cells through lNa channels. [ ] This effect favors the sodium and calcium homeostasis and prevents ischaemia-induced diastolic dysfunction.
Following electrical excitation, Na ions enter the cardiac cells through membrane Na channels and cause rapid depolarization of the action potential. The opening of the Na channels is very short and it is followed by a closure caused by their temporary inactivation by a cytoplasmic loop of the channel. The Na channels remain then closed until the next membrane depolarization. A small portion of the Na channels, however, does not inactivate completely after the opening phase and continue to open and close during the repolarisation phase of the action potential. This late opening of the Na channels allows a constant current of Na ions (INa) to enter the myocardial cell throughout the early repolarisation phase that coincides with the mechanical systole.
During ischaemia and hypoxia a marked late opening of the Na channel after depolarization is observed, this causes the late Na current, which is the principal source for intracellular Na. [ , , ] The Na current activation leads to an elevation of intra-myocyte Na concentration [ , , ] that in turn contributes to the elevation of intracellular calcium. [ , ].
Therefore, the intracellular increase of Na leads to an augmented exchange of intracellular Na for extracellular calcium (with Na exit and calcium entry), and a reduced exchange of intracellular calcium for extracellular Na (with calcium exit and Na entry) that in turns results into intracellular calcium overload. The myocardial calcium overload causes an increase in actin/myosin interaction and an increase in myocardial oxygen consumption and a decrease in left ventricular diastolic relaxation. Ranolazine reduces the late INa in a concentration- voltage- and frequency-dependent manner. [ , , , ] The effect of ranolazine on sodium and calcium homeostasis and contractile function has been demonstrated in experimental models of rat hearts in which sodium overloading was caused by increased INa. [ ] During ischaemia, ranolazine decreases late Na currents thereby reducing the increase in the intracellular sodium concentration, preserving the ionic homeostasis and preventing calcium overload. An important effect of ranolazine on the late INa is the reduction of the accumulation of intracellular calcium and the associated increase in ventricular stiffness and myocardial oxygen consumption. Ranolazine has been shown to improve diastolic ventricular relaxation during ischaemia/reperfusion in rabbits, [ ] in the isolated rat heart in the presence of ischaemic metabolites, [ ] and in in ventricular myocytes from dogs with ischaemic left ventricular dysfunction.
Clinical Use of Ranolazine
Ranolazine has been approved for clinical use in the USA in 2006 as add-on therapy for the treatment of chronic angina and received a first-line indication in November 2008. The maximum approved dose in the USA is 1 g twice daily. In Europe, ranolazine (prolonged-release tablets) has been approved by the European Medicine Agency in July 2008 with a recommended initial dose of 375 mg twice daily that can be further titrated up to the recommended maximum dose of 750 mg twice daily.
Clinical Development Program
The principal dose–response study for the demonstration of the efficacy of ranolazine as anti-anginal and anti-ischaemic agent was the Monotherapy Assessment of Ranolazine In Stable Angina (MARISA) trial, [ ] which randomised 191 patients to either ranolazine or placebo. The study was followed by the CARISA study (Combination Assessment of Ranolazine In Stable Angina), [ ] that assessed the effect of ranolazine 750 mg twice daily or 1 g bid as add on to atenolol, amlodipine or diltiazem in 823 patients with chronic stable angina and by the the Efficacy of Ranolazine In Chronic Angina (ERICA) trial, in which 565 patients were randomised to receive ranolazine 1 g (bid) or placebo in addition to amlodipine 10 mg (od) for six weeks (Fig. 1 ). [ ] The MERLIN-TIMI 36 trial, randomised 6560 patients with acute coronary syndromes to receive ranolazine or matching placebo within 48 h from the onset of ischaemic symptoms who were followed for a median of 348 days. [ ]. Fig. 1 Angina frequency and use of sublingual nitrate in the ERICA study. Ranolazine significantly reduced both the primary and the secondary end point
The MARISA Study assessed the tolerability of three doses of ranolazine sustained-release (500, 1000 and 1500 mg) compared to placebo and their effects on treadmill exercise performance in a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, single cross-over study. The study showed a statistically significant improvement of exercise duration compared to placebo for all three doses of ranolazine from 24 s at 500 mg bid . to 46 s at 1500 mg bid, with a clear dose–response pattern. However, given the significant incidence of adverse events in patients receiving the 1500 mg bid dose the study led to select the maximum dosage of 1000 mg bid.
The TERISA study (Type 2 Diabetes Evaluation of Ranolazine in Subjects With Chronic Stable Angina) assessed in a parallel 8 week double-blind placebo controlled study the efficacy of ranolazine on the occurrence of angina and use of sublingual nitroglycerin in 949 diabetic patients with coronary artery disease and chronic stable angina treated with up to 2 anti-anginal agents. [ ] Ranolazine significantly reduced angina episodes compared to placebo (3.8 vs. 4.3 episodes, p = 0.008), and the use of sublingual nitrates (1.7 vs. 2.1, p = 0.003).
In the CARISA study 823 patients with chronic stable angina were randomised to either ranolazine 750 mg bid . ( n = 279), ranolazine 1 g bid or placebo as add-on treatment to atenolol 50 mg od, amlodipine 5 mg od, or diltiazem 180 mg od. Twenty-three percent of the patients were diabetics and 29 % had heart failure, over 60 % were hypertensives and 58 % have suffered a previous myocardial infarction. The primary efficacy end point was the change from baseline in exercise duration at trough after 12 weeks on study drugs. The mean increases in exercise duration at trough were statistically significantly greater for patients treated with either dose of ranolazine SR than with placebo. A significant improvement in the occurrence of anginal episodes and the use of sublingual nitrates was also observed with ranolazine. (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Effect of ranolazine on exercise parameters in the CARISA study. The doses of 750 and 1000 mg were effective in improving the ischemia-related exercise end points
The ERICA study assessed the effect of ranolazine in patients with coronary artery disease and chronic stable angina despite treatment with amlodipine 10 mg daily in a randomized placebo controlled paralled study. Patients allocated to ranolazine showed significantly lower weekly episodes of angina compared with patients receiving placebo. The effect on angina was mirrored by a significant reduction in the average weekly rate of nitroglycerin consumption.
More recently the RIVER-PCI study randomized 2389 patients with a history of chronic stable angina and incomplete coronary revascularization to receive ranolazine or placebo.
After PCI, the Seattle Angina Questionnaire angina frequency scored similarly in the ranolazine and placebo groups from baseline throughout month 12 and did not differ between groups. As such , the study indicated that there was no incremental benefit in adding ranolazine.. Although a significant improvement in angina frequency was observed with ranolazine in diabetics and in patients with more severe angina, this was only seen at month 6 and did not persist thereafter. [ ].
Meta-Analysis on Clinical Efficacy
A meta-analysis assessed the effects of ranolazine on anginal symptoms, sublingual nitrate use, functional capacity, electrocardiographic signs of myocardial ischemia and hemodynamic parameters in patients with chronic ischaemic heart disease. [ ] The meta-analysis analised randomized trials that have studied the effects of ranolazine on exercise duration, time to onset of angina, time to 1 mm ST-segment depression, nitrate use and occurrence of angina. Of 358 articles identified in the initial search, 28 were retrieved for more detailed evaluation, 22 studies were excluded (i.e. articles reporting data already included in previous reports) and 6 trials were selected for the analysis.
The analysis showed that Ranolazine treatment significantly improves exercise duration by 31.9 s, time to the onset of angina by 38 s, and time to 1 mm ST-segment depression by 36.2 s. Ranolazine was found to significantly reduce weekly angina frequency compared to placebo and weekly use of sublingual nitrates. Of interest, ranolazine treatment significantly reduced HbA1c levels compared to placebo in diabetic patients by 0.43 %. The results of this meta-analysis support the anti-anginal and anti-ischemic properties of ranolazine.
Effects on Glucose Metabolism
A positive effect or ranolazine on glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) was shown by the CARISA study (post-hoc) in patients with diabetes. [ ] In this study, ranolazine 750 mg and 1 g bid reduced significantly HbA1c compared with placebo (by 0.48 % and and 0.70 % respectively). Interestingly, patients receiving insulin showed a greater reduction in HbA1c. A reduction in HbA1c was also observed in the MERLIN-TIMI 36 trial. [ ] HbA1c fell from 7.5 % to 6.8 % with ranolazine and subjects without diabetes in the ranolazine group were 32 % less likely to develop new hyperglycaemia compared to the placebo group.
Two phase 3 trials have assessed the efficacy of ranolazine for glucose control in patients with type 2 diabetes receiving either metformin or glimepiride background therapy. The studies randomized 431 and 442 patients to ranolazine 1000 mg BID versus placebo added to glimepiride or metformin, respectively, for 24 weeks. Patients included in the metformin trial and receiving ranolazine had their metformin dose halved compared to the placebo group. When added to glimepiride, ranolazine produced a 0.51 % (95%CI 0.71, 0.32) decrease from baseline in HbA1c compared to placebo whereas when added to the halved dose of metformin, no significant difference in HbA1c from baseline was observed. [ ].
The effect of Ranolazine on glucose metabolism suggests a specific indication as first line therapy in diabetic patients with coronary artery disease. The decrease in HbA1c is similar to that obtained with the newest oral anti-diabetic medications.
Clinical Indication for the Use of Ranolazine in Chronic Stable Angina
The aim of therapeutic interventions in patients with chronic stable angina is to improve prognosis and quality of life. However, no drugs other than anti-platelets, statins and ACE-inhibitors have been shown to improve prognosis in patients with chronic stable angina. The effect of both beta-blockers and ivabradine in post-infarction patients and/or in those with heart failure cannot be translated to chronic stable coronary artery disease. Data from registries and clinical trials do not support the chronic use of beta-blockers for prognostic benefits in patients with chronic stable angina. Therefore, the classification of first and second line anti-anginal drugs for the treatment of angina must be revised and all anti-anginals should be placed on the same level unless a clear prognostic benefit is shown. Despite the growing numbers worldwide of percutaneous revascularization procedures in patients with chronic stable angina the number of patients uncontrolled with single anti-anginal medications is increasing both because of the increasing burden of the disease and because of the failure to modify the natural history of chronic coronary artery disease with percutaneous interventions.
Therefore, there is an unmet need for additional drugs with anti-anginal effects especially for those that act on targets other than the ones commonly used by the classic haemodynamic agents. The extensive clinical development program of ranolazine in patients with chronic stable angina supports its use in combination with anti-anginal drugs for the treatment of patients with chronic stable angina. Because of the lack of any effect on heart rate or on blood pressure ranolazine is a drug very easy to handle even in the difficult patients with low heart rate or blood pressure where haemodynamic conditions do not allow further intervention with haemodynamic agents. Therefore, ranolazine has a role in the therapeutic armamentarium for the treatment of chronic stable angina alone or in association with heart rate reducing agents. The mechanism of action of ranolazine suggests that its effects may be potentiated by other metabolic interventions such as trimetazidine.
Pharmaco-economic studies have demonstrated the cost-effectiveness of ranolazine in patients with chronic stable angina. The incremental cost-utility ratio of using ranolazine compared with a placebo is 8455 Euro (9377 USD) per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY)/patient and the incremental cost-utility ratio is particularly effective in non-hospitalized patients with mild or moderate angina frequency. [ ].
Conclusions
Ranolazine is a non-haemodynamic anti-anginal agent effective as adjunctive therapy in patients with chronic stable angina whose symptoms are not controlled by conventional treatment. Ranolazine improves exercise performance, decreases both angina and the use of sublingual nitrates, compared to placebo and is well tolerated, with a neutral effect on haemodynamics.