Introduction
Overwhelming evidence supports the use of statins for prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disease. Subsequently, there are over 30 million patients taking statins in the United States alone [ ]. In general, statins are well tolerated; however, evidence suggests that 10–20 % of patients in clinical practice experience statin-associated adverse events while receiving statins [ , , , ]. Whereas 70–90 % of these patients will tolerate a second statin successfully, a small subset of these patients will experience similar symptoms upon rechallenge with other statins, invariably leading to long-term statin discontinuation and increased cardiovascular risk [ , , , ]. Adoption of the most recent American College of Cardiology (ACC) and American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines would expand the number of adults eligible for statin treatment by approximately 13 million [ ], potentially increasing the number of patients for whom high-dose statins are recommended and, therefore, likely increasing the number of patients who develop adverse events to statin therapy. Although statin intolerance is a clinical syndrome that is not well defined [ ], there is increasing consensus on many aspects of the condition. The syndrome has been typically described as the inability to tolerate at least two statins due to significant symptoms and/or biomarker abnormalities that are attributable to statin therapy and not due to drug-drug interactions or untreated secondary causes [ ]. The most common side effects from statin therapy include muscle aches, pains and weakness without creatine kinase (CK) elevation. In addition, symptoms may be accompanied by CK elevation, resulting from myositis, which rarely progresses to rhabdomyolysis [ , , , ]. Patients have also reported a number of non-specific side effects that appear to be idiosyncratic, such as itch, vesicular rash, and other types of rash. Occasionally patients describe headaches, non-specific gastrointestinal symptoms, impotence, and rarely, memory problems. Unfortunately, memory problems and other neurocognitive symptoms occur commonly in the community, especially in patients eligible for statin therapy. In PROSPER (Prospective Study of Pravastatin in the Elderly at Risk) and the Heart Protection Study, cognitive function was assessed at baseline and at least once later [ , ]. Cognitive impairment was exactly the same in patients on placebo and in patients receiving pravastatin or simvastatin. However, other rare adverse effects of statins have also been described [ , , , , ]. The wide variety of patient-described symptoms, as well as use of terms such as partial statin intolerance or complete statin intolerance [ ] contribute to the lack of clarity surrounding this clinical syndrome. Though statin intolerance is widely recognized by clinicians and frequently encountered in clinical settings, the statin-intolerant population has been poorly characterized. We sought to describe the statin-intolerant population enrolled in The Goal Achievement after Utilizing an anti-PCSK9 antibody in Statin Intolerant Subjects Study (GAUSS-2), a phase 3 clinical trial evaluating the effect of subcutaneous evolocumab administered biweekly and monthly vs. ezetimibe on percent change from baseline in LDL-C in hypercholesterolemic subjects unable to tolerate an effective dose of a statin due to SAMS [ ].
Methods
Patients
Patient characteristics in the GAUSS-2 study have been described previously [ , ]. Briefly, eligible patients between 18 and 80 years old, who were either not on a statin or able to tolerate only a low-dose statin due to muscle-related statin intolerance and were not at LDL-C goals as defined by National Cholesterol Education Project (NCEP) Adult Treatment Panel (ATP) III risk category [ ] were enrolled in the GAUSS-2 study. Per patient or physician report, patients must have tried ≥2 statins and been unable to tolerate any dose or increase in dose above a total designated weekly dose (defined as atorvastatin ≤70 mg/week, simvastatin ≤140 mg/week, pravastatin ≤140 mg/week, rosuvastatin ≤35 mg/week, lovastatin ≤140 mg/week, or fluvastatin ≤280 mg/week) due to intolerable myopathy, ie, myalgia (muscle pain, ache, or weakness without CK elevation), myositis (muscle symptoms with CK elevation) or rhabdomyolysis (muscle symptoms with marked CK elevation), which resolved or improved significantly upon dose decrease or discontinuation. A standardized questionnaire was not used to assess SAMS. Major exclusion criteria included New York Heart Association class III or IV heart failure, type 1 diabetes mellitus or poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus, moderate or severe renal dysfunction (estimated glomerular filtration rate <30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ), liver enzymes >2 times the upper limit of normal (ULN), or CK >3 times the ULN at the time of enrollment.
Study Design and Oversight
GAUSS-2 (NCT01763905) was a global, randomized, double-blind, phase 3, placebo- and ezetimibe-controlled study. Patients were randomized to one of 4 treatment arms in a 2:2:1:1 fashion: subcutaneous (SC) evolocumab 140 mg every 2 weeks (Q2W) plus daily oral placebo; SC evolocumab 420 mg monthly plus daily oral placebo; SC placebo Q2W plus daily oral ezetimibe 10 mg; and SC placebo monthly plus daily oral ezetimibe 10 mg. Amgen designed the study in collaboration with academic investigators, and was responsible for data collection and analysis. The institutional review boards at each site approved the protocol, and all patients provided written informed consent.
Statistical Analysis
Descriptive statistics were used to analyze the baseline characteristics of patients enrolled in GAUSS-2. Data are expressed as mean (standard deviation [SD]), median (Q1, Q3), or percentages.
Results
Patients
GAUSS-2 randomized 307 patients categorized as statin intolerant between January and August 2013 to evolocumab ( n = 205) or ezetimibe ( n = 102). Baseline demographics are shown in Table 1 . Patients had a mean (SD) age of 61.5 (9.8) years, 46 % were women and the majority of patients were white (94 %). Over half of patients (59 %) had hypertension and approximately one-third of patients had a history of coronary artery disease, including percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass graft. A majority of patients (56 %) were at high risk for cardiovascular disease based on NCEP risk category. Based on patient history, 55 % of patients had tried 3 or more statins with 21 % of patients having tried 4 or more statins. The three most common statins received were atorvastatin (77 %), simvastatin (73 %), and rosuvastatin (71 %; Fig. 1 ). Patients had extremely elevated baseline mean (SD) LDL-C of 4.99 mmol/L (1.51) and non-HDL-C of 5.88 mmol/L (1.56), as well as elevated high-sensitivity C-reactive protein of 2.6 (2.9) mg/L (Table 1 ). Table 1 Baseline characteristics and lipid parameters Characteristic Patients ( N = 307) Age (years) Mean (SD) 61.5 (9.8) Range 22–80 Female, n (%) 141 (45.9) Race, n (%) White 287 (93.5) Asian 10 (3.3) Black or African American 7 (2.3) Other 3 (1.0) Statin use at baseline, a n (%) 55 (17.9) Other lipid-lowering medications, b n (%) 47 (15.3) Comorbid illness, n (%) Type 2 diabetes mellitus 62 (20.2) Hypertension 181 (59.0) Coronary artery disease 90 (29.3) Percutaneous coronary intervention 60 (19.5) Myocardial infarction 45 (14.7) Coronary artery bypass graft 28 (9.1) Cerebrovascular or peripheral arterial disease 49 (16.0) Peripheral arterial disease 18 (5.9) Congestive heart failure 6 (2.0) Lipids c LDL-C, mmol/L 4.99 (1.51) Apolipoprotein B, g/L 1.38 (0.33) HDL-C, mmol/L 1.34 (0.41) Apolipoprotein A-I, g/L 1.50 (0.28) Non-HDL-C, mmol/L 5.88 (1.56) Total cholesterol, mmol/L 7.22 (1.57) Triglycerides, mmol/L, median (Q1, Q3) 1.72 (1.26, 2.43) Lp(a), nmol/L, median (Q1, Q3) 32 (11, 124) hsCRP, mg/L 2.6 (2.9) hsCRP high sensitivity C-reactive protein, HDL-C high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, LDL-C low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, Lp(a) lipoprotein A a Sub-therapeutic doses of statins that allowed for inclusion in the trial b Includes bile acid sequestrants, fibrates, nicotinic acid, and other medications c Data are mean (SD) unless specified Fig. 1 Intolerance by statin. Symptom category experienced by patients is shown according to statin type
Statin-associated Muscle Symptoms
Statin-associated muscle symptoms were experienced by 99.7 % of patients (Table 2 ; one subject did not report a statin-associated muscle symptom but was statin-intolerant due to elevated liver function tests). The most commonly reported SAMS were pain (78 %), ache (64 %), cramps (40 %), and weakness (39 %). Of patients’ worst SAMS, the most common was myalgia (80 %); 18 % reported myositis and 2 % reported a history of rhabdomyolysis. Most patients described bilateral SAMS (97 %), with generalized body symptoms in 42 %, lower extremity symptoms in 48 %, upper extremity symptoms in 22 % and trunk symptoms in 7 %. The proportions of patients experiencing the various levels of disruption of daily life from SAMS were 20 %, minor disruption; 52 %, interferes with moderate exertion; 17 %, interferes with major exertion; and 8 %, major disruption—defined as confined to bed or stopped work. A family history of muscular symptoms was reported in 18 % of patients and a family history of muscle-related symptoms while receiving a statin was reported in 16 % of patients. Median times to muscle-related statin intolerance by drug were as follows: lovastatin, 4 months; atorvastatin, fluvastatin, simvastatin, rosuvastatin, and pravastatin, 2 months; and pitavastatin, 1 month. The potential influence of drug potency and sequencing on these times is not known. The types and frequencies of SAMS were generally balanced between men and women. Table 2 Muscle-related statin intolerance Patients ( N = 307) n (%) Any statin-associated muscle symptom 306 (99.7) Worst statin-associated muscle symptom Myalgia 246 (80.1) Myositis 54 (17.6) Rhabdomyolysis 6 (2.0) Distribution of muscle aches Lower extremity 148 (48.2) All over 130 (42.3) Upper extremity 66 (21.5) Trunk 20 (6.5) Symptoms leading to statin intolerance diagnosis Pain 239 (77.9) Aches 197 (64.2) Cramps 124 (40.4) Weakness 120 (39.1) Stiffness 93 (30.3) Heaviness 73 (23.8) History of CK elevation of >1x and <10x ULN 48 (15.6) Level of disruption to daily life Interferes with moderate exertion 161 (52.4) Interferes with major exertion 53 (17.3) Minor disruption 61 (19.9) Major disruption a 25 (8.1) Family history Muscular symptoms 56 (18.2) Muscular symptoms with statins 50 (16.3) CK creatine kinase, ULN upper limit of normal a Defined as confined to bed or stopped work
Nonmuscle Symptoms
In addition to muscle-related symptoms and side effects, nonmuscle symptoms leading to a statin-intolerant diagnosis were reported in 90 of 307 (29 %) patients (Table 3 ). All 90 patients reported neurocognitive symptoms. These symptoms included fatigue ( n = 24, 8 % of the entire study population), insomnia ( n = 17, 6 %), depression ( n = 14, 5 %), cognitive decline ( n = 8, 3 %), agitation ( n = 7, 2 %) and confusion ( n = 7, 2 %). In addition to neurocognitive symptoms, 48 patients (16 %) reported nonmuscle, nonneurocognitive symptoms (eg, symptoms such as nausea, rash, and general malaise). Median times to nonmuscle-related statin intolerance by drug were as follows: lovastatin, 5 months; pravastatin, 2.5 months; pitavastatin, 2 months; atorvastatin, fluvastatin, rosuvastatin, and simvastatin, 1 month. Table 3 Nonmuscle-related statin intolerance Patients ( N = 307) n (%) Nonmuscle-related symptoms 90 (29.3) Neurocognitive symptoms leading to statin intolerance diagnosis Fatigue 24 (7.8) Insomnia 17 (5.5) Depression 14 (4.6) Cognitive decline 8 (2.6) Agitation 7 (2.3) Confusion 7 (2.3) Anxiety 5 (1.6) Somnolence 5 (1.6) Hostility/violent behavior 2 (0.7) Other 25 (8.1) Nonneurocognitive and nonmuscle-related symptoms leading to statin intolerance diagnosis 48 (15.6)
Discussion
Much controversy and discussion has occurred regarding statin intolerance as randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of statins did not demonstrate a significant difference in reported myalgia when statin therapy was compared to placebo [ , , , ]. Statin myopathy is observed at a rate of approximately 5 % among statin-treated patients in RCTs and the rate is comparable to placebo [ , ]. However, SAMS are more commonly reported in clinical practice [ , ], and some observational studies report up to 7 %–29 % of statin-treated patients experiencing myalgia symptoms [ , ]. In the observational study PRIMO (PRedIction of Muscular risk in Observational Conditions), which followed 7924 patients on a high-dose statin, 11 % of patients reported muscular symptoms [ ]. There are a number of possible explanations for this discrepancy between the findings in RCTs and observational studies. First, some RCTs had a run-in period that excluded patients who experienced any adverse symptoms, including myalgia, during the run-in phase. Second, patients with other comorbidities that increase the risk of statin-related myopathy (eg, chronic liver or kidney disease, hypothyroidism, previous organ transplantations) were excluded from the trials. Finally, patients were not prospectively queried about muscle symptoms with dedicated questionnaires in the large statin RCTs [ , ]. Generally, mild to moderate symptoms are not reported if not prospectively queried. Identification of statin intolerance has been difficult due to the lack of consensus regarding definitions and criteria used to diagnose the spectrum of statin-associated adverse muscle complaints [ ]. While myositis and rhabdomyolysis are clearly defined, myalgia definitions have been inconsistent. Various organizations have proposed myalgia definitions without consensus among them. The ACC, in collaboration with the AHA and the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute, defines myalgia as muscle ache or weakness without CK elevation [ ]; the National Lipid Association defines myalgia as muscle ache or pain without CK elevation [ ]; and the European Atherosclerosis Society proposes describing all muscle-related complaints as muscle symptoms , which are then subdivided by the presence and degree of CK elevation [ ]. Thus, our study has meaningful current relevance as it adds to studies that seek to clarify and characterize this important and growing population [ ].
Some have advocated rechallenging statin-intolerant patients with a statin using either daily or intermittent dosing. In the largest study to date, a retrospective analysis of 1605 patients intolerant to 2 or more statins, over 70 % were able to tolerate some form of statin therapy upon rechallenge [ ]. However, 28 % were unable to tolerate even a weekly dose of statin therapy due to symptoms. Nevertheless, many factors may account for tolerance upon repeat challenge that may be difficult to ascertain with retrospective analysis such as symptoms, drug interactions, thyroid status changes, and dosage changes. Therefore, a prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled assessment would provide the best estimate of intolerance. Because placebo-controlled trials have historically failed to use a standardized assessment, reports of myalgia are rare [ ]. However, a standardized assessment was conducted in the STOMP trial, which randomized 468 patients to atorvastatin 80 mg or placebo [ ]. Statin-naïve patients were assessed for muscle symptoms using a questionnaire and exercise testing at baseline and at 3 and 6 months. Additionally patients were called every 2 weeks. Myalgia was defined as the presence of all four following conditions: (1) new or increased muscle pain, cramps, or aching not associated with exercise; (2) symptoms persisting for at least 2 weeks; (3) symptoms resolving within 2 weeks of stopping the study drug; and (4) symptoms reoccurring within 4 weeks of restarting the study medication. The number of patients meeting this definition was 19 (8 %) in the atorvastatin arm and 10 (4 %) in the placebo arm ( P = 0.05). This trial, therefore, may point towards a group of patients who are truly statin intolerant. Existence of such a population is supported by a large body of experimental evidence supporting the ability of statins to cause SAMS via a large variety of pathophysiological pathways [ ]. Note, however, that so far there is no definitive evidence that any of these pathways also explain the development of SAMS. In fact, withdrawals due to muscle symptoms during double-blind treatment in the ODYSSEY ALTERNATIVE trial were comparable among arms (16 % with the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 [PCSK9] inhibitor alirocumab, 20 % with ezetimibe and 22 % with atorvastatin) [ ]. These results demonstrated that most patients in the atorvastatin group, though deemed statin-intolerant, could tolerate this statin when they did not know they were allocated to this treatment and argues in favor of a substantial psychological component to this problem. There is a very small group of patients who develop what has recently been described as anti-HMGCR antibody–associated necrotizing autoimmune myopathy, which is characterized by persistent muscular pain, weakness and wasting, predominantly of the leg, with CK elevation >1000 IU/L for months or years after statin discontinuation [ , ].
In the GAUSS-2 study, a majority of this statin-intolerant population had tried 3 or more statins with significant adverse effects that led, in some patients, to major disruption of their daily life. Moreover, a substantial proportion of patients experienced weakness, a more serious and concerning symptom. Myalgia associated with statins has often been described as flu-like in nature, involving the proximal muscle group. However, in our study, 42 % of patients described generalized body ache with a greater proportion of patients having lower extremity symptoms (48 %) than upper extremity symptoms (22 %). Interestingly, about 18 % of the patients had a family history of muscle pain, the majority of which was associated with statin use. The average age of patients was relatively low (62 years), consistent with the probability of a high incidence of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia in this population, and, as mentioned previously, the male to female ratio was balanced.
There has been much interest in the neurocognitive side effects of statins. In our study, a minority of patients reported having a history of neurocognitive symptoms at baseline, with the most common complaints being fatigue, insomnia, and depression. These data are similar to those from other studies, which reported insomnia and fatigue as the most common complaints [ , , , , ]. In this selected statin-intolerant group, cognitive decline and confusion were also noted; however, these events were not the primary endpoint and were therefore not validated with a scoring tool. These symptoms described by patients are minor symptoms for the diagnosis of major depressive disorder (MDD) [ ]. There is no evidence that statin therapy precipitates depression [ ], but it is known that in patients with coronary heart disease,15–20 % fulfill the criteria for MDD and up to 40 % fulfill criteria for mild or major depression combined [ , , , , ]. Patients may incorrectly attribute the depressive symptoms to statin therapy, resulting in a common misunderstanding in the community regarding statins. Recently, the United States (US) Food and Drug Administration mandated a statin label change warning of memory loss and confusion. These rare side effects were not seen in RCTs [ , , , , ]. When reported, the mild cognitive impairment usually resolves within a few days of statin discontinuation. Since marketing approval of statins in the US, cases of memory loss associated with statins have been observed [ , ].
There are limitations to our study. A standardized questionnaire was not available to assess SAMS, and use of such a method would improve the objectivity of the statin-intolerant diagnosis. Additionally, these findings were observed in patients enrolled in a randomized clinical trial and may not be generalized to patients in routine clinical care with various additional comorbidities.
Conclusion
Statins have been the cornerstone of primary and secondary prevention in patients with atherosclerosis for the past several decades. While the majority of patients can tolerate statins, there is a group of patients in clinical practice who cannot tolerate statins, leading to poor LDL-C control and thus, increased cardiovascular events. The absence of a difference in SAMS between placebo and statin therapy in RCTs has led to increased skepticism about the stain-intolerant patient population. However, there is no argument that in real life there is an increasing group of patients who are (real or perceived) intolerant to statins and whose quality of life is adversely affected by statin therapy. For these patients, statin intolerance is an important clinical entity that has a significant impact on their level of physical activity and well-being. Additionally, patients at high risk for cardiovascular events were unable to take adequate statin doses and thus were left without the known clinical benefits of statin therapy. Further studies are needed to better characterize and identify patients at risk for statin intolerance.