Introduction
The recent ESC Guidelines recommend 12 months duration of dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) in patients with acute coronary syndromes (ACS), irrespective of modality of treatment, either conservative or invasive [ ]. However, such patients are at high risk for subsequent ischemic events also in the long-term follow-up. The large-scale multinational observational GRACE registry enrolled an unselected population of patients affected by ACS, the five-year follow-up, available only for UK and Belgian cohorts of the study, which demonstrated that the late consequences of presentation with ACS, in terms of death, myocardial infarction (MI) and stroke are substantially greater than those seen during the initial in-hospital phase, as there were almost five-fold more deaths during follow-up than in the initial in-hospital admission with ACS and three-fold more cardiovascular events [ ]. Similarly, in a retrospective cohort study including almost 100.000 patients from Swedish national registries, the incidence of the primary composite endpoint (non-fatal MI, non-fatal stroke, or cardiovascular death) was 18.3% during the first 365 days post-index MI, but increased up to 20% in the following 36 months [ ].
The potential benefit of a prolonged intense antiplatelet therapy was initially tested among patients with stable coronary artery disease, the “Clopidogrel and Aspirin versus Aspirin Alone for the Prevention of Atherothrombotic Events” (CHARISMA) trial which showed that a combination of clopidogrel plus aspirin failed to reduce the rate of MI, stroke, or death from cardiovascular causes as compared to aspirin alone among patients with stable cardiovascular disease or multiple cardiovascular risk factors at a median follow-up of 28 months [ ]. Nevertheless, a potential benefit was seen in a pre-specified subgroup which had documented cardiovascular disease [ ], suggesting a potential benefit of protracted DAPT in stable patients with documented prior ischemic events. However , due to the limitations of subgroup analysis and the increased risk of moderate bleeding, this positive result should be interpreted with caution.
Three randomised clinical trials have been recently published assessing both safety and efficacy of a combination of aspirin with a second (or third) antiplatelet drug for the long-term secondary prevention of cardiovascular events in patients with prior ACS .
In the “Vorapaxar for secondary prevention of thrombotic events for patients with previous myocardial infarction” ( TRA2P TIMI 50) trial, patients with a history of atherothrombosis were randomized to receive Vorapaxar, a protease-activated receptor 1 inhibitor, or placebo in addition to standard antiplatelet treatment [ ]. A subgroup of patients (17.779) with a qualifying MI within the previous 2 weeks to 12 months was analyzed separately. The combination of vorapaxar with standard antiplatelet treatment (aspirin plus clopidogrel was administered in 78% of the patients) showed a reduction of cardiovascular death or ischemic events but increased the risk of moderate and severe bleeding assessed using the GUSTO bleeding scale at a median follow-up of 2.5 years.
The “Twelve or 30 Months of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy after Drug-Eluting Stents” (DAPT) Study, a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, compared 30 versus 12 months of dual antiplatelet therapy after coronary stenting [ ]; the prolonged regimen reduced the risk of stent thrombosis and MI in both stable patients and in those with previous ACS (DAPT-MI), at the price of an increased rate of bleeding [ ].
Recently, the “Long-Term Use of Ticagrelor in Patients with Prior Myocardial Infarction” (PEGASUS-TIMI 54) trial assessed the role of extended dual antiplatelet therapy in terms of secondary prevention in patients with a history of MI that occurred more than 1 year previously [ ]. The addition of ticagrelor, either 60 mg or 90 mg twice daily, to the standard aspirin regimen significantly reduced the risk of cardiovascular death, MI or stroke and increased the risk of major bleeding. A recent subanalysis of the “Short- Versus Long-Term Duration of Dual-Antiplatelet Therapy After Coronary Stenting” (PRODIGY) study confirmed the main study results showing that a regimen of 24 months of clopidogrel associated with aspirin in patients who had received a balanced mixture of drug-eluting or bare-metal stents did not reduce ischemic events but increased bleeding as compared to a 6-month clopidogrel plus aspirin regimen also in patients with prior ACS [ ]. The PRODIGY trial randomized patients 30 days after PCI to 6 vs. 24 months of dual antiplatelet therapy and was powered to detect a 40% reduction in ischemic events occurring between 1 and 24 months [ ]. More than one-third of events in the trial occurred within the first five months after randomization, when treatment was identical in both arms. As such, continued treatment with aspirin and clopidogrel should have eradicated the great majority of events after 6 months in order to achieve a 40% reduction over the 6-month dual antiplatelet regimen. Based on this design, the primary study was underpowered and any subgroup analysis very difficult to interpret. For these reasons we did not include this study in our analysis.
The real benefit of a prolonged dual antiplatelet therapy in ACS patients is not clear due to some relevant limitations of the available studies: 1) the three trials (TRA2P, DAPT-MI, PEGASUS) show significant differences in baseline characteristics of the study populations and time of patients enrolment 2) trials show a reduction of ischemic events but a concomitant increased risk of bleeding and the net clinical benefit of prolonged treatment is difficult to estimate and 3) different antiplatelet drugs and different dosages of the same drug have been tested in combination with aspirin, making the choice of the best long-term antithrombotic strategy difficult .
We will try to analyse separately each of the afore-mentioned issues.
Study populations differences
Two of the three studies (DAPT-MI, TRA2P-TIMI 50) are actually subgroup analyses and invariably are less powered than parent studies: type 2 error may therefore affect the interpretation of their results. Baseline characteristics of the populations are quite similar in DAPT-MI and TRA2P-TIMI50, whereas the PEGASUS trial appears to have included subjects with a higher risk profile (Table 1 ). The PEGASUS population indeed shows a higher rate of patients affected by diabetes (32% vs 21–22% in the other trials), hypertension (77% vs 58–69%) and chronic kidney disease (23% vs 3–11%). Such differences may affect the final results since the effect of an antithrombotic treatment is expected to be more evident in a higher risk population. It should be noticed however that the median time from the qualifying MI to randomization was 1.7 years in PEGASUS, showing that patients included in that trial were clinically stable. On the other hand, the TRA2P-TIMI50 trial randomized about half of the patients within three months of ACS, adding vorapaxar or placebo to aspirin and clopidogrel, whereas the standard of treatment for the first year after the acute event should be, according to Guidelines, aspirin added to a novel P2Y12 inhibitor, either prasugrel or ticagrelor [ ]. Finally, the DAPT-MI study randomized only those patients who did not sustain a major event during the first year after PCI and were compliant with the dual therapy so that the study results are only relevant to patients who had achieved this quite remarkable clinical effect. It must be said however that the clinical dilemma regarding continuing dual antiplatelet therapy usually concerns patients with ACS who have safely completed their 12-month treatment period. In this regard, the DAPT-MI population best reflects the routine clinical practice and the conundrum faced by the cardiologists when patients end the first year of dual antiplatelet therapy. Table 1 Baseline characteristics of patients in the PEGASUS, DAPT-MI and TRA2P-TIMI50 trial DAPT-MI n = 3.371 PEGASUS n = 21.162 TRA 2°P-TIMI50 n = 17.779 Age (median) 58 65 59 Female 22% 24% 21% Weight (Kg) 90 82 N.A. Diabetes 21% 32% 22% Hypertension 58% 77% 62% STEMI 47% 53% 52% PAD 3% 5% 9% CKD 3% 23% 11% Prior PCI 100% 83% 83% Multivessel CAD NA 59% NA Prior Stroke/TIA 2% Excluded 5% F-up duration (months) 18 33 (median) 30 (median)
The afore-mentioned differences on study population characteristics do not allow to select a specific group of patients who are likely to benefit from a long-term DAPT regimen. Novel decision tools have been recently developed to determine, among patients eligible for long-term dual antiplatelet therapy, those more likely to derive benefit (versus harm) from long-term therapy. The DAPT score takes into account clinical variables like age, diabetes, cigarette smoking, previous myocardial infarction and PCI and procedural variables like PCI on vein graft and stent diameter less than 3 mm: Kereyakes et al. demonstrated that patients with a previous myocardial infarction have greater risk of late ischemic events but the DAPT score improves the prediction of patient benefit and harm from continued dual antiplatelet therapy beyond assessment of myocardial infarction history alone [ ].
Unfortunately the actual usefulness of this kind of scores is still a matter of debate: Yeh et al., recently showed that among patients not sustaining major bleeding or ischemic events 1 year after PCI, a prediction rule assessing late ischemic and bleeding risks to drive DAPT duration has modest accuracy in derivation and validation cohorts [ ].
In conclusion, because some patients with myocardial infarction have a high risk of bleeding and some patients without have a high risk of ischemia, using the one determinant (myocardial infarction history alone) to decide treatment duration seems to be inadequate: predictive scores have been tested but have not yet demonstrated enough accuracy.
The problem of measuring complex composite endpoints
When new antithrombotic strategies are tested, the hypothesized reduction of ischemic events is associated with a potential increase of the bleeding risk and clinical trials are usually designed to measure both efficacy and safety endpoints. As expected, the vast majority of these studies conclude that the new antithrombotic treatment reduces cardiovascular events at the price of an increase rate of bleeding and the actual usefulness of such a treatment in clinical practice is difficult to estimate.
The lack of a standardised definition of major bleeding is a significant pitfall: the GUSTO classification (used in the DAPT-MI and in the TRA2P study as safety end-point), relies primarily on clinical data elements, whereas the TIMI definition, which relies primarily on laboratory data elements [ , ], was used in the PEGASUS trial and even in the TRA2P study. These definitions were originally developed to assess bleeding in STEMI patients treated with fibrinolytic therapies; they may not apply to the contemporary treatment of NSTE ACS patients, particularly during the long-term secondary prevention treatment period after hospitalization. The heterogeneity in laboratory and clinical data used to define bleeding has resulted in published reports of bleeding rates ranging from 1% to 10% in contemporary literature [ ]. This degree of variability limits the comparison of safety profiles of antithrombotic agents. To help resolve these issues of inconsistency, the Bleeding Academic Research Consortium (BARC) recommended a standardized bleeding reporting system which reports bleeding in a hierarchical manner using a graded numerical system and incorporates both clinical presentations alongside laboratory findings [ ]. This scale however was used only in the DAPT-MI study.
Analyses conducted in trials comparing different dual antiplatelet therapy durations in patients undergoing elective percutaneous coronary interventions show that increased bleeding is significantly associated with extended dual antiplatelet treatment. In a network meta-analysis of randomized trials, Palmerini et al. found that all-cause mortality was also increased with longer periods of dual antiplatelet therapy [ ]. Indeed in that analysis the increase in non-cardiac mortality with prolonged dual antiplatelet therapy was not offset by any benefit in reduced cardiac mortality, and resulted in overall greater all-cause mortality. Although all mechanistic underpinnings of the greater risk of non-cardiac mortality with extended dual antiplatelet therapy remain elusive, bleeding may play a relevant role in this setting. Recent data have shown that major bleeding is strongly associated with mortality after percutaneous coronary interventions, and that by reducing the risk of bleeding, total mortality can be reduced [ , ].
In the DAPT-MI trial fatal bleeding was rare, but numerically increased in the continued thienopyridine arm, and so were death related to any prior bleeding or bleeding related death with trauma. Cancer related deaths were conversely statistically increased with prolonged therapy but were rarely related to bleeding; there was no significant difference in the incidence of new cancer diagnosis during the study, but more patients with a history of cancer, in some cases metastatic, were by chance enrolled in the continued thienopyridine group, with a substantial contribution to mortality [ ].
In the PEGASUS trial that enrolled 21.162 patients after a mean duration of follow-up of 33 months there were globally 941 deaths from any cause (4.4%), of which 566 were defined as cardiovascular (60%). Likewise in the 3.576 patients enrolled in the DAPT-MI study there were 51 deaths (1.4%), of which 20 (39%) were defined as non-cardiovascular in the 18 months of randomized treatment following the first year after stent implantation. Therefore 4 out of 10 deaths occurring in patients with ACS after the first year are due to non-cardiovascular causes.
When the effects of a drug (or of an intervention ) are to be considered, global mortality better reflects the balance between reduction of ischemic risk and increase in bleeding than cardiovascular mortality. The data on extended DAPT in ACS patients show that cardiovascular mortality is decreased, whereas global mortality tends to increase with an increase in bleeding. Including cardiovascular mortality in the primary efficacy endpoint is misleading since an apparent gain in survival may be perceived, whereas global survival is unchanged or even worsened. For these reasons we believe that all-cause death, rather than cardiovascular death, should be included in the composite primary endpoint of trials aimed at assessing the global clinical benefit of any new antithrombotic treatment strategy.
A triple composite end point including all-cause death, MI and stroke not only would better describe the long-term outcome of ACS patients, but would also incorporate all the catastrophic consequences of bleeding, that is the occurrence of non-cardiac death and MI as a result of premature cessation of antiplatelet treatment after a bleeding episode, potentially leaving patients vulnerable to recurrent ischemic events [ ] and stroke including intracranial hemorrhages (Fig. 1 ). Measuring such a clinical benefit endpoint, that includes the dreadful effects of bleeding, would make trials results easier to understand and to apply in every day clinical practice. Fig. 1 Schematic representation of how the triple composite endpoint (all-cause death, MI, stroke) may include the major adverse clinical events associated to the use of DAPT. DAPT = double anti-platelet therapy; MI = myocardial infarction; ST = stent thrombosis
Which antithrombotic regimen should we choose for a long-term DAPT?
When deciding to continue DAPT after 12 months in ACS patients, one important issue that needs to be addressed regards the intensity of the antiplatelet treatment, since the ischemic risk gradually decreases over time, while the bleeding risk, which is related to durable patients characteristics (such as anemia and renal function), remains constant or even worsens with time.
The long term DAPT strategy has been tested in the three trials with different combinations of antiplatelet drugs; aspirin has been associated with clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor or varopaxar. The lack of a direct comparison of these pharmacological strategies makes it difficult to choose the best combination of antiplatelet drugs.
The evaluation of number needed to treat (NNT) and number needed to harm (NNH) values might be useful to understand the actual benefit/harm profile of a study treatment (Figs. 2 and 3 ). NNT and NNH values actually show a better outcome in the DAPT-MI group, where clopidogrel was used in combination with aspirin in the vast majority of patients (66.4%), and no significant interaction was found when the results were separately analyzed for patients receiving clopidogrel or prasugrel [ ]. Moreover, in the DAPT-MI study the primary efficacy endpoint included all-cause death, whereas in the PEGASUS trial it included cardiovascular death. As a matter of fact, NNT numbers would have been higher if all-cause death rather than cardiovascular death had been included in the primary efficacy endpoint, particularly for the 90 mg study arm: non-cardiovascular death was 1.6% for placebo, 1.7% for the 60 mg ticagrelor and 2.1% for the 90 mg ticagrelor groups, whereas cardiovascular deaths, included in the primary efficacy endpoint, were 3.4%, 2.9% and 2.9% respectively. Small changes would be observed in the TRA2P-TIMI 50 trial, where the absolute risk difference in favour of vorapaxar was 0.4% for cardiovascular death and 0.3% for all-cause death. Fig. 2 Comparison of the NNT and NNH values in the PEGASUS, DAPT-MI and TRA2P-TIMI50 trial. It is worth notice that NNT refers to the primary efficacy end-point which is different in the three studies: a composite of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or stroke in the PEGASUS trial, stent thrombosis and major adverse cardiovascular events (a composite of death, myocardial infarction, or stroke) in the DAPT trial and a composite of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or stroke in the TRA2P-TIMI 50 trial. NNH refers to major bleedings which constitute the safety end-point. Bleeding classification varies among the three studies: TIMI criteria have been used in the PEGASUS trial, GUSTO and BARC criteria in the DAPT trial, GUSTO and TIMI classification in the TRA2P-TIMI 50 trial. NNT = number needed to treat; NNH = number needed to harm Fig. 3 Comparison of the NNT and NNH values in the PEGASUS, DAPT-MI and TRA2P-TIMI50 trial. NNT refers to cardiovascular mortality and NNH refers to non-cardiovascular mortality
Conclusion
Which answer for the question asked in the title? We believe that despite the interesting results shown by the TRA2P-TIMI 50 trial, vorapaxar cannot be considered for long-term treatment, because patients were enrolled in that trial during the first year after ACS, whereas Guidelines do not consider this option. It seems that a dual antiplatelet therapy may provide beneficial effects, particularly when clopidogrel, as shown by the DAPT-MI data, or the low-dose (60 mg) rather than the usual dose (90 mg) of ticagrelor is used, probably because the reduction of ischemic events is not offset by a greater amount of bleeding complications . Incorporating all-cause mortality, rather than cardiovascular mortality, in a net clinical global composite endpoint would permit to better determine the possible lethal side effects related to a prolonged treatment.