Introduction
Peri-procedural myocardial infarction (PMI) is a common and significant complication of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). The current guideline defines PMI by a significant troponin elevation within 48 h of PCI which is accompanied by clinical features of myocardial ischaemia [ ]. While advances in interventional technology and techniques have translated into a reduction in procedure related myocardial infarction and mortality, the incidence of PMI has not changed significantly. Studies on therapies for PMI to date have also been met with mixed results. Across the board the incidence of PMI varies from 4.6–10 % [ , , ] depending on the definitions used, while adverse clinical outcomes has been observed in individuals affected by PMI [ ], including a seven fold increase in the incidence of major cardiovascular events (MACE) at one year and mortality at 2 years post PCI [ , ].
The etiology of PMI may be divided into two categories. The “proximal type” PMI is related to mechanisms within proximity of the stent - the most common of these being dissection and side-branch occlusion. “Distal type” PMI occurs in the absence of any identifiable epicardial structural abnormality and is thought to be attributable to microvascular dysfunction, which accounts for 50 to 75 % of PMI [ ].
The underlying pathophysiology of “distal type” PMI remains enigmatic. The best-understood and accepted mechanism is the distal embolization of atheromatous debris upon disruption of the coronary plaques [ ]. Localized thrombotic activation is also contributory [ , ]. Further, it has been postulated that microvascular dysfunction as a result of neurohormonal activation and release of the bioactive substances such as endothelin (ET-1) may have a role to play [ , ]. The role of endothelin-mediated microvascular dysfunction in PMI is the focus of the current investigation.
Methods
ENDORA-PCI is an investigator initiated, double-blind, placebo-controlled, single-center, randomized trial designed to investigate the therapeutic effect of Ambrisentan on the peri-procedural index of microvascular resistance (IMR) in patients with non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome (NSTEACS) undergoing PCI. Overall we aim to recruit 52 patients (26 controls; 26 treatment) who present to our institution for treatment and who meet the inclusion criteria. The inclusion and exclusion criteria are listed in Table 1 . The study schema is presented in Fig. 1 . Table 1 Inclusion and exclusion criteria for ENDORA-PCI Inclusion Criteria Exclusion Criteria • Age > 18 years • ST-elevation myocardial infarction • Typical ischaemic chest pain lasting ≥20 min • Prior history of a thrombotic disorder • Either • Pregnant women or women of child bearing potential who are planning to become pregnant within the next 3 months 1. Electrocardiographic changes: • Haemodynamic instability a. new ST segment depression of ≥0.1 mV in ≥2 contiguous leads; or • Acute heart failure during the index admission b. new transient T wave inversion of ≥0.2 mV in ≥2 contiguous leads • Significant hepatic impairment (history or cirrhosis or abnormal serum ALT or AST 3-fold greater than the upper limit of normal) 2. Troponin T > 100 ng/L; or a 30 % rise in a 6-h troponin when the initial troponin T is 14–100 ng/L. • Patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis with or without secondary pulmonary hypertension. • Patients who exhibit or may exhibit hypersensitivity to Ambrisentan or to any of the excipients • Significant renal impairment (eGFR < 30) • Enrolled in other concurrent trials Abbreviations: ALT: alanine transaminase; AST: aspartate transaminase; eGFR: estimated glomerular filtration rate Fig. 1 Trial Schema for the ENDORA-PCI trial; NSTEACS: non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome; RCT: randomized controlled trial; PCI: percutaneous coronary intervention; IMR: index of microvascular resistance
The specific aims of this study are the following: To evaluate peri-procedural changes in IMR (∆IMR) in patients with NSTEACS undergoing PCI To determine whether the risk of PMI as measured by peri-procedural IMR can be reduced by pre-procedural ET-1 receptor antagonism with Ambrisentan. To elucidate the underlying mechanisms of PMI including platelet and neutrophil activation, and determine whether ET-1 receptor antagonisms may influence the risk of PMI through these potential mechanisms.
The primary hypotheses of the study are: IMR increases following PCI for patients with NSTEACS This peri-procedural rise in IMR can be attenuated by pre-procedural ET-1 receptor antagonism with Ambrisentan
The secondary hypotheses of the study are: Platelet activation correlates with peri-procedural rise in IMR and that this can be attenuated by pre-procedural ET-1 receptor antagonism with Ambrisentan Neutrophil activation and increased oxidative stress correlates with peri-procedural rise in IMR, and that this can be attenuated by pre-procedural ET-1 receptor antagonism with Ambrisentan
Measurement of IMR will be carried out immediately before and after PCI. Before commencement of PCI, patients will receive an intracoronary injection of 200 mcg of glyceryl trinitrate and intra-venous adenosine infusion (140mcg/kg/min) to induce hyperemia. This is a necessary condition for the accurate measurement of IMR and other physiological parameters as described.
A PressureWire™ Certus™ guidewire (St Jude Medical, MN, USA) will be advanced down the target coronary artery so that the microsensor (3 cm from the tip) is well beyond the culprit stenosis and in the distal third of the target artery. Pressures at the guide catheter tip (P a ) and distal artery (P d ) will be recorded, and up to six thermodilution curves will be performed to measure the thermodilution-derived mean transit time (T mn ), which is an inverse correlate of coronary blood flow. Caution will be taken to ensure that the PressureWire is positioned similarly in the coronary artery on repeat measurements. The IMR is adjusted for the presence of collateral flow using the coronary wedge pressure (P w ), which is the pressure in the distal vessel during balloon inflation. This will be measured during the first balloon inflation. The IMR is then calculated using the following equation: $$ IMR={\mathrm{P}}_{\mathrm{a}}\times {\mathrm{T}}_{mn}\times \left({\mathrm{P}}_{\mathrm{d}}-{\mathrm{P}}_{\mathrm{w}}\right)/\left({\mathrm{P}}_{\mathrm{a}-}{\mathrm{P}}_{\mathrm{w}}\right) $$
Blood samples will be collected at various time points (during admission and peri-procedurally) from multiple sites (peripheral veins, arteries and coronary arteries) for standard as well as experimental assays. The latter include troponin, platelet activity and evidence of neutrophil activation. Platelet aggregation will be measured using Multiplate® Impedance aggregometry. Neutrophil activation is determined by Myeloperoxidase (MPO) and elastase activity. High sensitivity troponin T will be measured by Roche Diagnostics in a single laboratory (99 % cut-off 14 ng/L). Blood samples will be centrifuged and frozen at −81 °C and batch-analyzed.
Patients will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive oral doses of Ambrisentan or placebo from the time of recruitment, with minimization based on acute coronary syndrome (ACS) subtypes and history of diabetes mellitus. This will take place during the index hospital admission using the MINIM randomization software and performed by a neutral research coordinator (E.A.R) who will not be involved in any aspects of the research project. Participants will be assigned a randomization number, which will correspond to the treatment allocated.
The Medical Advisory Committee (MAC) at our institution will act as the Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) for the trial. It will monitor trial progress, ensure the integrity of the study process, and be responsible for the safety of study participants. The MAC consists of interventional and clinical cardiologists, as well as the General Manager and Director of Operations affiliated with our institution. The MAC contains one external member who will act as an independent panel member for the DSMB. Only 1 member of the MAC (out of 10) is directly affiliated with the present trial. The MAC meeting takes place once a month.
As the number of subjects included in this study is relatively small, the value of an interim analyses is limited. Early termination of the study thus will be governed by the safety end point, and adjudicated by the MAC. The MAC has the authority to unblind subjects who have suffered an adverse event. Early termination of the study will be considered if two or more serious adverse events have occurred in either of the trial arms during the course of the study.
The ethics approval for ENDORA-PCI was obtained from the Human Research and Ethics Committee (HREC) of the South Eastern Sydney Local Health District, Sydney, Australia, in October 2013 (ref no. 13/049). The trial has been registered with the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (registration number: ACTRN12615000709549). All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
Statistical Consideration
Peri-procedural changes in IMR has not been extensively studied to date. A recent study observed an overall increase in IMR of 20.6 +/− 6.0 % following PCI for patients with non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) [ ], with a greater ∆IMR observed (86.8 +/− 110.5 %) in those with PMI than those without (−5 +/− 21 %). A less dramatic trend has been observed in another study looking at patients with stable coronary artery disease, reporting a ∆IMR of 22.1 % following PCI in the PMI group as compared with 3.2 % in patients who did not suffer PMI (absolute difference of 19.0 %) [ ]. No studies have been performed to investigate the effect of Ambrisentan on IMR, although with every 20 % incremental increase in IMR, there appears to be an adverse correlation with infarct size, myocardial hemorrhage, microvasular obstruction on cardiac magnetic resonant imaging in the acute setting following primary PCI for ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). It also correlates with infarct size as well as left ventricular function and remodeling in the intermediate term [ ].
The primary endpoint is the difference in the peri-procedural change in IMR (∆IMR), between patients who receive Ambrisentan and placebo. Assuming normal distribution, sample size was calculated based on a hypothesized absolute difference of 20 % between the two study arms, with an estimated standard deviation of 25 %. With an overall sample size of 52 patients, the study will be able to achieve a power of 80 % at a significance level of 5 %. The secondary endpoints are listed in Table 2 . Table 2 Secondary endpoints for the ENDORA-PCI trial End Points Rationale Pre-procedural IMR • Measure of microvascular dysfunction associated with NSTEACS • Possible correlate of risk of PMI ∆MPO/Elastase Activity • Marker of neutrophil activation and oxidative stress as a result of PCI ∆Platelet activity by Multiplate aggregometry • Marker of platelet activation as a result of PCI Abbreviations: IMR: index of microvascular resistance; NSTEACS: non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome, PMI: peri-procedural myocardial infarction; MPO: myeloperoxidase; PCI: percutaneous coronary intervention
Statistical analysis will be performed using SPSS (SPSS Inc) statistical software. Normality of data will be tested with the Kolmogorove-Smironov statistic. Non-parametric tests e.g. Mann-Whitney test will be used where appropriate. Continuous variables are summarized as mean +/−SD. Continuous variables will be compared with the Student t test. Linear regression will be used to assess predictors of change in IMR following PCI. Multivariate logistic regression will then be performed to assess the impact of a set of variables on peri-procedural change in IMR. Analyses will also be performed to interrogate the effect of Ambrisentan on pre-procedural IMR, platelet and neutrophil function as well as peri-procedural changes in IMR, adjusting for key lesion, patient and procedure related factors 51 . p < 0.05 is considered statistically significant.
Discussion
Endothelin and Peri-Procedural Myocardial Infarction
ET-1 is the most potent intrinsic vasoconstrictor known [ ]. It is a 21 amino-acid peptide that is produced predominantly by the endothelial cells of blood vessels in response to stressors including pro-inflammatory cytokines, hypoxia, shear stress, oxidized-LDL and thrombin. ET-1 is thought to act primarily in an autocrine and paracrine fashion by binding to two specific G protein coupled receptors. These receptors are referred to as the endothelin type A (ERA) and endothelin type B (ERB) receptors. In the human coronary artery, ERA comprises approximately 85 % of all ET-1 receptors [ ]. ERA are located predominantly on the vascular smooth muscle cells and cardiac myocytes and are responsible for the vasoconstrictor and presser effects of ET-1 [ ].
The expression of ET-1 differs significantly between normal and atherosclerotic arteries. In the normal human coronary artery, there is little stored ET-1 as expression of ET-1 is regulated at the transcriptional rather than secretory level. In comparison, ET-1 is found in abundance in atheroma. Multiple in vitro immunohistochemical studies have demonstrated that smooth muscle cells and macrophages within atheromatous plaques are capable of synthesizing ET-1. Moreover, ET-1 immunoreactivity is observed not only within these cells and endothelial cells, but also in the extracellular spaces surrounding them [ , , , , ]. This increased expression of ET-1 in atherosclerotic arteries translates into a significant and measurable vasoconstrictive effect, particularly at the sites of significant stenosis [ , ].
The presence of intracellular and extracellular ET-1 within coronary plaques raises the possibility that ET-1 may play an important role in the pathogenesis of peri-procedural microvascular injury. Indeed, multiple angiographic studies have established that ET-1 is liberated from coronary plaques following disruption with balloon angioplasty [ , , ]. This has been demonstrated in both stable and acute patients, though the degree of ET-1 release appears to be greater in patients presenting with an ACS [ , , , ]. In a study of 128 patients with STEMI, an elevation in ET-1 levels was associated with “slow-flow”, late microvascular obstruction on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, and a long-term poorer prognosis [ ].
Systemic ET-1 levels rise rapidly after acute myocardial infarction (AMI), peak at around 6 h and fall within 24 h [ ]. A rise in ET-1 is also evident in patients suffering from unstable angina, non-Q wave AMI [ ] or undergoing PCI [ ]. ET-1 acting through ERA promotes vasoconstriction [ ], neutrophil adhesion and activation via increased production and release of platelet activating factor (PAF) as well as up regulation of CD11b/CD18 expression [ , ], generation of reactive oxygen species [ , , ], a rise in intracellular calcium levels [ , ], and cardiomyocyte apoptosis [ , ]. These parallel the proposed mechanism of ischemia/reperfusion myocardial injury observed in both ACS and post-PCI setting [ , ].
Endothelin Antagonism and Prevention of Peri-Procedural Myocardial Infarction
Based on these observations, it is likely that ET1 antagonism may be beneficial in preventing myocardial injury in the setting of spontaneous infarction or PCI, particularly if it is administered during the perfusion and not the ischemic phase. Several proof of concept studies have been published both in human and with animal models [ ], although none have been in the setting of NSTEACS or PCI.
Ambrisentan is an orally active endothelin receptor antagonist which is selective for the ERA [ ]. Selective inhibition of ERA inhibits phospholipase C mediated vasoconstriction, whilst preserving nitric oxide and prostacyclin production, cGMP and cAMP mediated vasodilation, and ET −1 clearance that is associated with the ERB. Ambrisentan is absorbed rapidly in humans, with maximum plasma concentration reached 1.5 h after oral administration. It is metabolized and excreted predominantly through the liver, with no dose adjustment required for the elderly patients [ ].
Ambrisentan was initially trialled in humans as a therapeutic agent for symptomatic idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension and pulmonary hypertension associated with connective tissue disease. The ARIES-1 and ARIES-2 trials [ ] demonstrated significant improvement in these patients’ functional class associated with Ambrisentan therapy. At a daily dose of 5 to 10 mg, Ambrisentan is well tolerated with a limited side effect profile. The effect of Ambrisentan on the coronary microcirculation is so far untested, although its rapid absorption after oral administration and ERA selectivity makes it an ideal candidate for the purpose of the present trial.
Index of Microvascular Resistance
The IMR has emerged as a promising method of evaluating the state of the coronary microcirculation. It can be measured before and after a PCI, thus allowing for assessment of the state and change of the coronary microcirculation peri-procedurally. Importantly, IMR is quantitative, highly reproducible and simple to perform. IMR also correlates closely with biochemical and imaging markers of myocardial damage [ , ] and may be elevated in the absence of a troponin leak after PCI. Indeed, elevated pre-procedural IMR [ , ] as well as peri-procedural change in IMR [ ] have been shown to predict a troponin rise after PCI. IMR is thus not only a sensitive marker of peri-procedural myocardial injury mediated by microvascular dysfunction, but a potential means of risk stratification for PMI in patients undergoing PCI.
This study is unique as currently most large scale studies on peri-procedural variation in IMR have focused on patients with stable coronary disease [ , ]. To date, studies performed in unstable patients with NSTEACS are limited in numbers and small in scale [ ]. Furthermore, none of these studies have investigated the effect of endothelin antagonism on the effect of peri-procedural IMR. We plan to study the peri-procedural change in IMR in a moderately-sized cohort of unstable patients with NSTEACS and determine whether the administration of an endothelin antagonist will alter the state of coronary microcirculation peri-procedurally, thus potentially the incidence of PMI.
Clinical Implication of the Study
The global epidemiological landscape of ACS has evolved with an increased emphasis on primary prevention, improved therapies, increasing sophistication of diagnostic techniques, and the consequent change in cardiovascular risk factor profile for the population as a whole. In Australia, there are between 45,000 to 50,000 hospital admissions every year with myocardial infarctions. Among these, between 35,000 and 40,000 were a result of NSTEMI. While the incidence of STEMI has reduced significantly over the last 2 decades, the incidence of NSTEMI has risen dramatically from 67 to 182 cases per 100,000 person-years [ ], a trend disproportionate to the effect of introduction of troponin assays, and echoed by studies overseas [ ]. Around 50 % of patients with NSTEMI will have an angiogram in Australia and 24 % will have a PCI [ ]. The absolute number of patients undergoing PCI for NSTEACS every year in Australia and certainly globally is therefore substantial.
PMI occurs in 24–48 % [ , ] of PCI for patients with NSTEACS, and has been shown by many to increase the intermediate to long term incidence of adverse cardiovascular outcome by close to 7 fold [ , , ]. The potential burden of disease caused by PMI both at present and in the future therefore cannot be neglected. Through this study, we hope to demonstrate that the status of the coronary microcirculation both before and following PCI predicts patients’ susceptibility to PMI in the setting of NSTEACS. To this end, measurement of IMR may permit refinement of patients’ risk stratification and provides a potential target for therapy.
Further, we hope to demonstrate that ET-1 is a significant contributor to microvascular dysfunction as a result of PCI, via its effects on vasoconstriction and increased neutrophil and platelet activation. By blocking these pathways with an endothelin antagonist we hope to achieve a reduction in the incidence of PMI as estimated by IMR, improved coronary microcirculation both before and after PCI, and ultimately improved patient outcome. If successful, the beneficial effects of endothelin antagonism could be extrapolated to patients with STEMI or stable patients with refractory ischaemia but with normal epicardial disease (microvascular angina) - an emerging subset of diagnostically and therapeutically challenging patients.
Conclusion
The ENDORA-PCI study will investigate whether endothelin antagonism with Ambrisentan attenuates the peri-procedural rise in IMR in patients with NSTEACS undergoing PCI, and thus potentially the risk of PMI.