Introduction
Despite the increasing application of percutaneous interventions, vein graft (VG) bypass surgery remains an essential therapy for patients with advanced peripheral and coronary artery disease [ ]. However, neointimal hyperplasia frequently presents in the setting of VG bypass surgery. Accumulating evidence has shown that abnormal proliferation and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are the main cause of neointimal hyperplasia [ ]. Moreover, infiltration of leukocytes and macrophages into the neointima may lead to the development of atherosclerosis and multiple severe cardiovascular disorders [ , , ]. Thus, effective suppression of neointimal hyperplasia is necessary for disease prevention and long-term health.
Human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been isolated from numerous tissues including bone marrow, adipose tissue, and the umbilical cord [ , , ]. In addition to their ability to differentiate into multiple mesenchymal tissues, they have immunomodulatory properties resulting from secretion of bioactive trophic factors [ , ]. Recently, MSCs have been shown to release circular membrane fragments, named extracellular vesicles (EVs), which are anuclear particles containing various proteins and mRNAs [ ]. Currently, the role of EVs has been examined in several diseases models including acute kidney injury [ ], ischemia reperfusion [ ], and tubular injury [ ]. Most recently, Zhu et al. demonstrated that MSC-derived EVs reduce inflammation in endotoxin-induced acute lung injury [ ]. However, little is known about the effect of EVs on neointimal hyperplasia.
In this study, we hypothesized that administration of adipose-derived MSC EVs (ADMSC-EVs) may have a therapeutic effect in a mouse VG model. Our results showed that systemic injection of ADMSC-EVs significantly decreased the neointimal thickness by decreasing macrophage infiltration, attenuating inflammatory cytokine expression, and reducing activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K) signaling pathways.
Materials and Methods
Ethical Approval of the Study Protocol
All research involving human participants was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine (Shanghai, China). Written informed consent was obtained from the participating individual. The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, which adhered to generally accepted international guidelines for animal experimentation.
Isolation of AMSCs
Adipose tissue was obtained from a healthy male human donor, and clinical-grade ADMSCs were isolated according to a previous study [ ]. Briefly, the adipose tissue was digested with type IV collagenase (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) at 37 °C for 45 min, filtered through a 200-μm mesh strainer, and then centrifuged at 200× g for 10 min. The cell pellet was resuspended in complete medium consisting of low glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 20 % fetal bovine serum (FBS) (both purchased from Life Technologies), seeded at a density of 4000 cells/cm 2 , and grown at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere with 5 % CO 2 . At 80 % confluence, the cells were trypsinized and passaged. Cells at passages three to five were used to isolate EVs.
Isolation of EVs
EVs were obtained from the culture supernatants of MSCs and foreskin fibroblasts as described previously [ ]. Briefly, after reaching confluency, ADMSCs and foreskin fibroblasts were cultured in serum-free Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 0.5 % bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) for 48 h. After centrifugation at 3000× g for 20 min to remove cellular debris, the culture supernatant was centrifuged at 100,000× g for 1 h at 4 °C to pellet the EVs. The Evs were washed in Medium-199 (M-199) (Life Technologies) containing 25 mM N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N′-2-ethanesulfonic acid (Life Technologies) and then processed by a second round of ultracentrifugation under the same conditions. Protein quantification of the Evs was performed using a Bradford assay (Beyotime Inc., Nantong, China). The EVs were suspended in M-199 containing 5 % DMSO and stored at −80 °C until use.
Characterization of EVs
Transmission Electron Microscopy
EVs were fixed with PBS containing 2.5 % glutaraldehyde for 2 h. After washing with PBS, the EVs were ultracentrifuged under the conditions described above and resuspended in 100–150 μL PBS. A single drop of EVs was loaded onto a formvar/carbon-coated grid, stained with 3 % aqueous phosphotungstic acid for 1–2 min, and then examined by transmission electron microscopy (H-7650, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan).
Flow Cytometric Analysis of MV Surface Markers
Because the diameters of the EVs were less than 1 μm and out of the range for flow cytometry, the EVs were incubated with latex beads (4 μm, Molecular Probes, Carlsbad, CA) for 30 min at 4 °C before labeling with specific antibodies or isotype control antibodies. The MV-coated beads were then washed and analyzed immediately using a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA). The antibodies used were specific for CD29, CD34, CD44, CD45, CD63, and CD73 (all purchased from BD Pharmingen, San Jose, CA).
Isolation of Mouse VSMCs
Cell lines of cultured VSMCs, each originating from the inferior vena cava (IVC) of a single mouse, were established by digesting the IVC with type II collagenase (Worthington Biochemical, Lakewood, NJ) after carefully removing loose adventitia as described previously [ ]. VSMCs were cultured under standard conditions in DMEM/Nutrient Mixture F-12 supplemented with 20 % FBS. Cells were passaged up to a maximum of seven times before use in experiments.
Functional assessment of VSMCs
Cell Proliferation
VSMCs (1 × 10 4 ) were seeded into 96-well plates in DMEM/F12 containing 20 % FBS, Fungizone (Sigma-Aldrich), and gentamicin (Sigma-Aldrich). After 48 h of culture, ADMSC-EVs (100 or 200 μg/mL) or the vehicle control (M-199 alone) were added to the cells. Two days later, cell proliferation was evaluated by measuring DNA synthesis with a colorimetric bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) ELISA kit (Shanghai JinMa Laboratory and Equipment Company, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions using a microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) to measure the absorbance.
Three-Dimensional (3D) Migration of VSMCs
Three-dimensional rat type-1 collagen gels were prepared as described previously [ ]. A polymerizing collagen mixture (30 μL) was pipetted into the upper chamber of a 24-well Transwell insert (Corning, Corning, NY) onto a porous membrane (pore diameter: 8 μm). After polymerization of the gels, DMEM (200 μL) containing 0.2 % FBS and VSMCs (1 × 10 5 ) was added to the upper chamber. An insert was placed into the lower well of the chamber filled with DMEM (600 μL) containing 2.5 % FBS and platelet-derived growth factor-BB (20 ng/mL; Upstate Biotechnology, Lake Placid, NY), which were used to stimulate VSMC migration through the collagen gel, and ADMSC-EVs (100 or 200 μg/mL). After 48 h of culture, the inserts were removed, the collagen gels were scraped away, and the membranes were stained with Diff-Quick (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, Munich, Germany). The migrated cells underneath the membrane were counted under a microscope.
Model of Vein Grafting and ADMSC-MV Treatment
Surgery was performed on mice as described previously [ ]. Briefly, the right common carotid artery of a male mouse was ligated proximally and distally, and transected at its mid-portion. The transected ends were passed through polyethylene cuffs, everted back over them, and secured with ligatures. A segment (1 cm) of the IVC was excised from a different male donor mouse. The cuffed ends of the transected artery were inserted into each end of the VG and secured with sutures. Blood flow was restored by removing the ligatures, and the surgical wound was sutured closed. Postoperatively, mice received ADMSC-EVs (20 μg in 150 μL M-199, intraperitoneally) every other day for 20 days. Veins were then collected for analysis.
Immunohistochemistry
VGs were processed and immunostained as described previously [ ]. Negative controls, prepared by omission of the primary antibody or substitution with a non-immune, isotype control primary antibody, were examined to confirm the specificity of the primary antibodies. Macrophages were detected with rat anti-Mac-3 IgG (BD Pharmingen) and Texas Red-conjugated goat anti-rat IgG. Nuclei were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. To quantify macrophage immunostaining, images of cross-sections were captured under identical conditions and imported into Image-Pro Plus software (Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD). Four regions of interest (ROIs) were drawn within the neointima at 12, 3, 6 and 9 o’clock positions or directly overlying the vascular endothelium. The amount of positive immunostaining within each ROI (expressed as positive pixels/mm −2 ) was determined by false color segmentation analysis and then averaged.
Macrophage Migration Assay
Murine macrophages were harvested from the peritoneal cavity at 4 days after intraperitoneal injection of thioglycollate. Macrophage migration was examined using Transwell inserts (Corning) containing porous membranes (pore diameter: 8 μm). Macrophages (3 × 10 5 , suspended in RPMI-1640 containing 10 % FBS) were placed in the upper chamber, and RPMI-1640/10 % FBS containing monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1, 10 ng/mL; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) and ADMSC-EVs (100 or 200 μg/mL) were placed in the lower chamber. After 24 h, the number of cells that had migrated to the lower chamber was counted.
Real-Time Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) Analysis of Inflammatory Cytokine Genes
Veins were retrieved from adult mice immediately after sacrifice and rinsed extensively. Total cellular RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen). RT-PCR was carried out using a One Step SYBR® PrimeScript™ RT-PCR kit (Takara, Dalian, China) and iQ5 Real-time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Expression of the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) gene was assessed simultaneously in all samples as an internal control. Relative gene expression was determined by the 2 –ΔΔCT method [ ]. Oligonucleotide primers specific for interleukin (IL)-6, MCP-1, and GAPDH are listed in Table 1 . Table 1 Primer sequences for IL-6, MCP-1 and GAPDH Primer name Forward primer (5′-3′) Reverse primer (5′-3′) IL-6 GACAACTTTGGCATTGTGG ATGCAGGGATGATGTTCTG MCP-1 GAAGGAATGGGTCCAGACAT ACGGGTCAACTTCACATTCA GAPDH CAAAGCCAGAGTCCTTCAGA GATGGTCTTGGTCCTTAGCC
Western Blotting
Cells in frozen vein tissues obtained from model mice were lysed in RIPA buffer, followed by high-speed centrifugation and protein quantification using a bicinchoninic acid assay. Cellular proteins were separated bysodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. After blocking, the membranes were incubated with anti-total- or -phospho-Akt, -Erk and -p38 monoclonal primary antibodies (Cell Signaling Technology, Cambridge, MA). Actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) was used as the loading control. Appropriate horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies were applied to detect labeled proteins. The protein bands were developed with Super Signal Ultra Chemiluminescent Substrate (Pierce, Rockford, IL) on X-ray films (Kodak, Tokyo, Japan).
Statistical Analyses
All statistical analyses were carried out using SPSS version 18 (SPSS, Chicago, IL). Data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation. The Student’s t -test or one-way analysis of variance was used to examine differences between groups. A p-value of less than 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
Isolation and Characterization of ADMSC-EVs
ADMSC-EVs isolated from the culture supernatants of ADMSCs were lipid bi-layer vesicles of 20–150 nm in diameter and spherical in shape (Fig. 1a ). Flow cytometric analysis showed that ADMSC-EVs were positive for CD29, CD44, CD63, and CD73, and negative for CD34 and CD45 (Fig. 1b ). Fig. 1 Generation and characterization of ADMSC-EVs. a ADMSC-EVs observed by transmission electron microscopy. b Flow cytometric analysis of surface markers on ADMSC-EVs
ADMSC-EVs Inhibit the Proliferation and Migration of VSMCs
We used ADMSC-EVs to treat VSMCs and then evaluated their proliferation using an MTT assay and BrdU incorporation. The optical density value was significantly lower in the ADMSC-MV-treated group compared with the control-EV and vehicle control groups (100 μg/mL: 206 ± 10 vs. 300 ± 15 and 312 ± 16, both p < 0.05; 200 μg/mL: 158 ± 8 vs. 300 ± 15 and 312 ± 16, both p < 0.01) (Fig. 2a ). We also used a 3D culture system to examine the effect of ADMSC-EVs on VSMC migration. In the 3D migration assay, the number of migrated cells was significantly lower in the ADMSC-EV-treated group compared with the control-EV and vehicle control groups (100 μg/mL: 106 ± 12 vs. 140 ± 18 and 150 ± 20, both p < 0.05; 200 μg/mL: 62 ± 8 vs. 140 ± 18 and 150 ± 20 μg/mL, both p < 0.01) (Fig. 2b ). Fig. 2 Effect of ADMSC-EVs on the proliferation and migration of VSMCs. a BrdU incorporation assay. b Results of the 3D migration assay. # p < 0.05 compared with vehicle control and control-EVs groups, * p < 0.01 compared with vehicle control and control-EV groups
ADMSC-EVs Inhibit Intimal Hyperplasia In Vivo
We established a mouse VG model and tested the effect of ADMSC-EVs in vivo. Neointima formation was thicker in the control group than the ADMSC-EV-treated group (Fig. 3a ). The mean intimal thickness was significantly lower in ADMSC-EV-treated mice than in the control-EV and vehicle control groups (26 ± 8.4 vs. 45 ± 9.0 and 48 ± 9.4 μm, both p < 0.05) (Fig. 3b ). Moreover, we found labeled EVs in the vessel wall (Figure S1 ). Fig. 3 Effect of ADMSC-MV treatment in a mouseVG model. a Image of intimal hyperplasia. b Intimal thicknesses of ADMSC-EV and control groups. * p < 0.05 compared with vehicle control and control EVs groups
Decreased Macrophage Migration and Accumulation in VGsafter ADMSC-EV Treatment
To explore possible mechanisms underlying the effect of ADMSC-EVs on neointimal formation, we examined their effect on macrophage migration in vitro and observed a significant decrease in the number of migrating macrophages after treatment with ADMSC-EVs (Fig. 4a ). We also quantified macrophage invasion into VGs. At day 7, decreased macrophage immunostaining was found in ADMSC-EV-treated VGs compared with control VGs in control-EV and vehicle control groups (0.0033 ± 0.0012 vs. 0.0040 ± 0.0014 and 0.0042 ± 0.0015, p > 0.05) (Fig. 4b ). At day 28, a statistically significant difference in the extent of macrophage immunostaining was found in the ADMSC-EV-treated group compared with control-EV and vehicle control groups (0.023 ± 0.002 vs. 0.038 ± 0.0025 and 0.039 ± 0.003, both p < 0.05) (Fig. 4c ). Fig. 4 ADMSC-EVs decrease macrophage migration and invasion into VGs. a ADMSC-EVs decreased the migration of macrophages. Data are the means of three experiments. b Immunohistochemical quantification of macrophages in VGs at 7 days after surgery. The difference between ADMSC-EV-treated and control groups did not reach statistical significance. C: At 28 days after surgery, the macrophage content of VGs was significantly lower in ADMSC-EV-treated mice than in control mice. # p < 0.05 compared with vehicle control and control-EV groups, * p < 0.01 compared with vehicle control and control-EV groups
Inhibitory Effect of ADMSC-EV Treatment on Expression of Inflammatory Cytokine Genes
We examined the expression of inflammatory genes IL-6 and MCP-1 in ADMSC-EV-treated VGs. Relative expression of IL-6 and MCP-1 was significantly lower in ADMSC-EV-treated VGs compared with control-EV and vehicle control groups (Fig. 5a and b ). In addition, we measured the phosphorylation of signaling molecules in the related pathways. As shown in Fig. 5c , decreased levels of phospho-Akt, -Erk1/2, and -p38 were found after treatment with ADMSC-EVs. Fig. 5 Expression of inflammatory cytokine genes and activation of Akt and MAPK signaling pathways. a Difference in IL-6 mRNA expression. b Difference in MCP-1 mRNA expression.* p < 0.05 compared with vehicle control and control-EV groups. Relative gene expression was determined by the 2 –ΔΔCT method. c Activation of Akt and MAPK pathways was involved in the therapeutic effect of ADMSC-EVs
Discussion
In this study, we tested the effect of ADMSC-EVs on neointimal hyperplasia. Our results showed that ADMSC-EVs exerted inhibitory effects on the proliferation and migration of VSMCs in vitro. Moreover, we found that intraperitoneal injection of ADMSC-EVs significantly decreased the neointimal thickness in a mouse model of VG bypass. In addition, our results indicated decreased macrophage migration, attenuated expression of IL-6 and MCP-1, and reduced phosphorylation of MAPKs and Akt as possible mechanisms involved in the therapeutic effect of ADMSC-EVs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study on the use of ADMSC-EVs for the treatment neointimal hyperplasia.
In 2009, Bruno et al. first reported EVs derived from bone marrow MSCs, and showed that EVs are 80 nm to 1 μm anuclear particles consisting of numerous proteins, mRNAs, microRNAs, organelles, and lipids [ ]. Moreover, a recent review has suggested that EVs may be a heterogenous population that might include exosomes, microvesicles, and other entities [ ]. Here, we found that the size of EVs ranged from 20 to 100 nm, slightly smaller than those characterized by Bruno et al., which we attribute to the different source tissue used to prepare the MSCs. In our study, EVs were isolated from ADMSC cultures. Moreover, we observed surface expression of CD29, CD44, CD63, and CD73, which are known to be expressed on the MSC plasma membrane, but no expression of CD34 and CD45.
Because proliferation and migration of VSMCs are thought to be the main cause of neointimal hyperplasia [ , ], we examined the effect ADMSC-EVs on VSMC proliferation and migration. Our results showed that ADMSC-EVs significantly inhibited the proliferation and migration of VSMCs. Next, we established a mouse VG bypass model, tested the effect of ADMSC-EVs in vivo, and observed the same inhibitory effects. Previous studies have also shown that macrophage invasion into the wall of VGs is a critical event during the vascular remodeling process [ , ]. In our study, we observed significantly decreased immunostaining of macrophage markers after treatment with ADMSC-EVs, which is consistent with reduced macrophage migration.
Cytokine-mediated inflammatory responses also play an important role in neointimal hyperplasia of VGs. Cytokines such as IL-8, IL-1, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor-α(TNF-α), and MCP-1 are involved in the inflammatory response [ ]. These inflammatory factors may work together to enhance the signaling pathways in the proliferation and migration of VSMCs [ ]. In our study, we did not find a significant difference in the expression of IL-1β or TNF-α (data not shown), but the expression of IL-6 and MCP-1 was significantly decreased after treatment with ADMSC-EVs. The involvement of IL-6 in VSMC migration and proliferation was consistent with a study by Xiang et al. [ ]. Similarly, Kim et al. reported an association of MCP-1 deficiency with attenuated intimal hyperplasia after arterial injury [ ]. In addition, MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways have been reported to be involved in VSMC migration [ ]. Consistent with this finding, we observed decreased phosphorylation of MAPK and Akt after treatment with ADMSC-EVs.
Conclusions
Our study suggests the potential therapeutic use of ADMSC-EVs in the treatment of neointimal hyperplasia. In a mouse VG model, a significantly decreased intimal thickness was observed after treatment with ADMSC-EVs, which we attribute to decreased macrophage infiltration, attenuated inflammatory cytokine expression, and reduced activation of MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways.