Introduction
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), characterized by low serum immunoglobulins (Ig) and impaired specific antibody production, is not only associated with recurrent infections but also an increased risk of autoimmunity and cancers. Scandinavian estimates have suggested a tenfold increased risk of gastric adenocarcinoma in individuals with CVID [ ], and in an Australian CVID population, a standardized incidence ratio of 7.23 for gastric cancer has been demonstrated [ ]. Risk factors for gastric cancer in the general population include Helicobacter pylori ( H. pylori ) infection, atrophic gastritis, gastric intestinal metaplasia, and Asian ethnicity.
Screening protocols have been proposed for individuals with CVID, comprising urea breath tests to detect H. pylori and serum vitamin B12 levels to detect atrophic gastritis [ ]. However, some individuals with CVID without gastrointestinal symptoms and with both negative urea breath test and normal serum vitamin B12 have been shown following gastroscopy and biopsy to have atrophic gastritis or gastric intestinal metaplasia [ , ]. These individuals would not qualify for gastroscopy according to suggested screening protocols but are nevertheless at increased risk of gastric adenocarcinoma.
Data from the Netherlands have shown a very high incidence of endoscopic and/or histological abnormalities in 24 individuals with CVID, including those who were asymptomatic. Abnormalities were identified on endoscopy and/or colonoscopy in 88% of CVID patients without a prior gastrointestinal history, the majority of these affecting the upper gastrointestinal tract [ ]. A recent study from Norway confirmed a high rate of gastrointestinal symptoms and histopathological abnormalities on endoscopic biopsies, but a low incidence of H. pylori infection [ ]. Clearly, H. pylori is not the only precipitant of gastric inflammation in these individuals.
In Japanese and Korean populations, where there is a 5- to 10-fold increased risk of gastric cancer, similar to the risk in CVID, the incidence of advanced gastric cancer has been substantially reduced by implementing aged-based screening programs irrespective of symptoms. These involve double-contrast barium x-rays or upper endoscopies at least every 3 years, as screening every 4–5 years has been shown to be less effective in preventing gastric cancer [ , ]. In addition, a serum pepsinogen I concentration of ≤ 70 ng/ml and a pepsinogen I/II ratio of ≤ 3.0 have also been used to identify patients with extensive atrophic gastritis, who are therefore at increased risk of gastric cancer [ ].
Despite their increased risk of gastric cancer, individuals with CVID are not yet routinely offered screening for gastric cancer or early lesions with increased cancer risk, and no consensus guidelines are available worldwide. This study aimed to determine the prevalence of gastric pathology with malignant potential in Australian individuals with CVID, by offering all patients screening gastroscopy in addition to serum testing that has formed the basis of previously described screening strategies. A very high prevalence of premalignant lesions on screening gastroscopy was shown, and a new rational gastric cancer screening protocol for CVID patients has been proposed.
Methods
Recruitment
Fifty-five adults with CVID were prospectively recruited between 2016 and 2018 from four tertiary referral immunology units across Sydney. All patients gave written informed consent. The study was approved by the Western Sydney Local Health District Human Research Ethics Committee, with local governance approval at each site. Inclusion criteria were age of at least 18 years and a diagnosis of CVID, according to PAGID/ESID criteria [ ], meaning a marked decrease in IgG (at least two standard deviations below the mean for age) and at least one of the isotypes IgM or IgA, and the onset of clinically significant immunodeficiency at greater than 2 years of age, in the absence of other defined causes of hypogammaglobulinemia. Exclusion criteria were pregnancy, significant cognitive impairment or severe concurrent illness preventing gastroscopy or light sedation. A population of 41 individuals, who were already proceeding with gastroscopy for a clinical indication and were not known to be at particularly high risk of gastric cancer, were prospectively recruited as controls. Controls were selected to match the CVID group in terms of age, gender, ethnicity, and smoking history, as much as possible.
Questionnaire
Both CVID and control groups completed a basic questionnaire at the time of recruitment to identify gastrointestinal symptoms, previous endoscopy results, a history of H. pylori infection, family history of stomach or bowel cancer or stomach ulcers, smoking history, country of birth, and years since diagnosis of CVID (CVID group only).
Peripheral Blood
A fasting peripheral blood sample was analyzed for vitamin B12; 25-hydroxyvitamin D; immunoglobulin G, A, and M concentrations; iron studies; and memory B cell immunophenotyping. Total serum vitamin B12; 25-hydroxyvitamin D; immunoglobulin G, A, and M concentrations; and iron studies were performed by a multianalyzer (Abbott Architect, Abbott Park, IL, USA) in an accredited diagnostic laboratory (Westmead Hospital, NSW Health Pathology). Low or equivocal vitamin B12 results were confirmed with holotranscobalamin measurement. Memory B cell phenotyping was performed by flow cytometry in the same diagnostic laboratory. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were stained with the following fluorochrome-labeled anti-human antibodies: PerCP5.5-anti-CD19, PE-anti-IgM, APC-anti-CD27, FITC-anti-IgD, FITC-anti-CD21, and APC-anti-CD38 and processed on a FACS Calibur flow cytometer using BD CellQuest™ software (BD Biosciences). Gating strategies were determined according to published methods for Freiburg, Paris, and Euroclass classifications [ , , ]. A fasting peripheral blood sample was analyzed for serum pepsinogen I and II using human pepsinogen I and II enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits (Sigma-Aldrich).
Gastroscopy
All participants underwent gastroscopy under intravenous sedation, performed by one of three experienced gastroenterologists, unless they had already had a gastroscopy within the preceding 12 months, in which case the macroscopic findings were retrieved and the histology reviewed by the study pathologist. For all gastroscopies performed as part of the study, including both CVID patients and controls, a full macroscopic assessment of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum, including the presence of gastritis, intestinal metaplasia, atrophy, or other abnormalities, was performed. Four biopsies for histological assessment were taken from each of the gastric body, gastric antrum and second part of the duodenum, and two biopsies from the first part of the duodenum. A urease test was performed on gastric biopsy samples to assess for H. pylori status. All histology was reviewed by a single, highly experienced pathologist with gastroenterology expertise. Statistical analysis was performed using IBM SPSS version 21 (Chicago, IL), with a p value of ≤ 0.05 considered significant.
Results
Patient Characteristics
The characteristics of the 55 CVID patients and controls are described in Table 1 . The groups were well matched, with no significant differences other than an increased prevalence of diarrhea in those with CVID. The mean age of CVID patients was 51, with the majority being male (56%) and born in Australia (76%). Five remaining patients were from Europe, and one patient was from each of Lebanon, Egypt, Chile, South Africa, Fiji, Mauritius, New Zealand, and Hong Kong (European descent). None of the CVID patients were of Asian descent. Three patients had known genetic mutations ( NFKB2 , TACI , and ADA2 ). One CVID patient had a history of gastric carcinoma cured with a partial gastrectomy alone 5 years prior, while another had a remote history of cured small bowel B cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma from 2002. In addition, two had a family history of gastric malignancy. All CVID patients were on gammaglobulin replacement, 36 patients (65%) intravenously and 19 (35%) subcutaneously at the time of the study. All CVID patients except one had satisfactory trough IgG levels during the study period, with a mean serum IgG 8.4 g/L and median 8.27 g/L. Control IgG levels, with a mean of 10.8 g/L, were significantly higher than CVID patients ( p < 0.01). Table 1 Patient characteristics and history Variable CVID ( n = 55) Control ( n = 40) p value Age Mean 51 48 0.37 Range 18–82 18–74 Sex % male 31 (56.4%) 20 (50%) 0.54 Country of birth Australia 42 (76%) 27 (67%) 0.34 Other 13 (24%) 13 (33%) Years since CVID diagnosis Mean 10 N/A – Range 1–37 Significant smoking history 21 (38%) 13 (33%) 0.57 Previous gastroscopy >1 year ago 29 (54%) 17 (43%) 0.30 Previous diagnoses Gastric carcinoma 1 (2%) 0 (0%) 0.39 GI Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma 1 (2%) 0 (0%) 0.39 H. pylori infection 5 (9%) 3 (7%) 0.78 Family history Gastric cancer 2 (3.6%) 3 (7.5%) 0.65 Peptic ulcer disease 12 (22%) 6 (15%) 0.40 Symptoms Upper abdominal pain/discomfort 17 (31%) 17 (43%) 0.25 Heartburn 28 (51%) 20 (50%) 0.93 Frequent burping 18 (33%) 13 (33%) 0.98 Nausea or vomiting 12 (22%) 8 (20%) 0.83 Any upper GI symptoms 35 (64%) 29 (73%) 0.39 Diarrhea 28 (51%) 11 (28%) 0.02* Blood results Vitamin B12 deficiency (< 180 pmol/L) 3 (5.6%) 2 (5.3%) 0.95 Iron deficiency (ferritin < 20 μg/L) 2 (3.6%) 2 (5.1%) 0.72 Vitamin D deficiency (< 50 nmol/L) 19 (35.2%) 9 (23%) 0.21 Serum IgG (mean; g/L) 8.4 10.8 < 0.01* Results are given as absolute numbers, with percentages in parentheses. A significant smoking history is defined as having smoked at least a pack of cigarettes per day for at least 5 years, or current smoking. Mean serum IgG refers to trough IgG for CVID patients. Statistically significant p values are expressed in italics GI gastrointestinal, N/A not applicable * p ≤ 0.05
In total, 64% of CVID patients had at least one upper gastrointestinal symptom (pain, heartburn, burping, nausea). Twenty-seven patients (49%) reported intermittent or frequent diarrhea, in the absence of a known gastrointestinal infection. Three patients were found to have Giardia infection during the study. Fifty-four percent of CVID patients had undergone a gastroscopy at some point in the past, but none purely for screening related to CVID gastric cancer risk.
Forty CVID patients underwent gastroscopy as part of the study; an additional 12 patients had had a gastroscopy externally within the preceding year, 10 of whom had biopsies taken during the procedure. Three patients consented to the study but did not proceed to gastroscopy for personal reasons. No significant endoscopic complications were reported.
Individuals in the control group underwent gastroscopy for indications including gastroesophageal reflux, dyspepsia, bloating, dysphagia, abdominal pain, iron deficiency anemia, gastrointestinal bleeding, and altered bowel habit. One patient recruited as a control was found to have hypogammaglobulinemia due to previously undiagnosed nephrotic syndrome and was excluded. The remaining 40 controls had normal serum concentrations of IgG, IgA, and IgM. All control gastroscopies were performed as part of the study, not externally, and all underwent the full biopsy protocol.
Increased Prevalence of Intestinal Metaplasia and Atrophic Gastritis in the CVID Group
Biopsy results for 50 CVID patients and 40 controls are outlined in Table 2 . One or more histological abnormalities were detected in 80% of CVID patients, while 68% had gastritis or other gastric pathology. These values were not significantly different from the controls. Table 2 Gastric histopathology results Pathological diagnosis CVID ( n = 50) Control ( n = 40) p value Any histological abnormality 40 (80%) 26 (65%) 0.11 Gastric histological abnormality 34 (68%) 26 (65%) 0.82 Intestinal metaplasia 10 (20%) 1 (2.5%) < 0.01* Atrophic gastritis/gastric atrophy 4 (8%) 0 (0%) 0.07 IM or atrophy 11 (22%) 1 (2.5%) < 0.01* Non-atrophic gastritis Mild 21 (42%) 14 (35%) Moderate-severe 8 (16%) 2 (5%) 0.09 High-risk histology a 17 (34%) 3 (7.5%) < 0.01* Focal nodular lymphoid hyperplasia 8 (16%) 0 (0%) < 0.01* Gastric B cell lymphoma 1 (2%) 0 (0%) 0.37 Gastric or duodenal ulcer 3 (6%) 0 (0%) 0.12 Intraepithelial lymphocytosis 8 (16%) 1 (2.5%) 0.03* Dysplasia 0 (0%) 0 (0%) – Carcinoma 0 (0%) 0 (0%) – H. pylori infection 4 (8%) 3 (8.1%) 0.98 Collagenous gastritis 1 (2%) 0 (0%) 0.37 Giardiasis 3 (6%) 0 (0%) 0.12 Villous atrophy duodenum 3 (6%) 0 (0%) 0.12 Reflux esophagitis 5 (10%) 3 (7.5%) 0.68 Results are expressed as absolute numbers of patients who underwent gastroscopy with biopsies, with percentages in parentheses. Statistically significant p values are expressed in italics IM intestinal metaplasia * p ≤ 0.05 a IM, atrophy or moderate-severe gastritis
Premalignant gastric lesions, however, were significantly increased in CVID patients. Intestinal metaplasia (IM) was identified in 10 of the CVID cohort compared with one control (20 versus 2.5%, p < 0.01) and was not morphologically different from IM seen in other conditions. Atrophic gastritis was found in 4 CVID patients (8%), 3 of whom also had IM, meaning that overall, 22% of CVID patients had IM or atrophy, versus one control (2.5%, p < 0.01). In addition, moderate to severe non-atrophic gastritis was identified in 16% of CVID patients compared to 5% of controls, although this did not reach statistical significance ( p = 0.09). Altogether, 34% of CVID patients had gastric histology putting them at increased risk of gastric cancer, as compared to 7.5% of controls ( p < 0.01). H. pylori prevalence was low at 8% for both CVID and controls. Important incidental findings included collagenous gastritis, giardiasis, duodenal villous atrophy, and intraepithelial lymphocytosis. Three patients had peptic ulceration, but no dysplasia or malignancy was seen.
High-Risk Gastric Pathology Associated with Time Since CVID Diagnosis, Smoking, H. pylori, and Pepsinogen I Levels Less than 70 ng/ml
The predictors of adverse histology in CVID are outlined in Table 3 . Gastric IM or atrophy was associated with increasing years from CVID diagnosis and a significant history of smoking, defined as greater than a five-pack year history (i.e. having smoked a pack of cigarettes per day for 5 years) or current smoking ( p = 0.05). Seventy per cent ( n = 7) of CVID patients with IM had a history of smoking. H. pylori infection did not correlate with gastric atrophy or IM alone, but when patients with moderate to severe gastritis were included, it was a significant predictor ( p = 0.01). Pepsinogen I level ≤ 70 ng/ml was associated with high-risk gastric histology, but a pepsinogen I/II ratio of ≤ 3.0 did not predict any of the adverse histology types. Age and time since diagnosis of CVID in individuals with high-risk gastric histology, focal nodular lymphoid hyperplasia (FNLH), and lymphoma are shown in Fig. 1 . Table 3 Predictors of adverse histology in CVID Age Male gender Years CVID diagnosis Paris MB1 Smoking H. pylori Upper GI symptoms Diarrhea Vitamin B12 deficient Pepsinogen I < 70 ng/ml ( n = 26) Pepsinogen I/II ≤ 3 ( n = 26) Gastric IM or atrophy Present ( n = 11) 58.2 (13) 7 (64%) 13.9 (7) 5 (45%) 7 (64%) 2 (18%) 8 (73%) 10 (91%) 1 (9.1%) 3 (43%) 3 (43%) Absent ( n = 39) 49.9 (19) 21 (54%) 8.6 (8) 12 (33%) 12 (31%) 2 (5%) 25 (64%) 15 (38%) 2 (5.3%) 2 (11%) 6 (32%) p value 0.19 0.56 0.05* 0.40 0.05* 0.16 0.59 < 0.01* 0.64 0.06 0.66 High-risk gastric histology** Present ( n = 17) 52.8 (17) 9 (53%) 10.1 (8) 7 (41%) 8 (47%) 4 (24%) 12 (71%) 12 (71%) 1 (5.9%) 4 (40%) 5 (50%) Absent ( n = 33) 51.2 (19) 19 (58%) 9.6 (8) 10 (33%) 11 (33%) 0 (0%) 21 (64%) 13 (39%) 2 (6.3%) 1 (6.3%) 4 (25%) p value 0.79 0.75 0.82 0.61 0.34 < 0.01* 0.62 0.04* 0.96 0.03* 0.19 Focal Nodular Lymphoid Hyperplasia Present ( n = 8) 51.3 (12) 5 (63%) 11.3 (9) 6 (86%) 3 (37%) 3 (37%) 7 (87%) 5 (63%) 0 (0%) 2 (40) 4 (80%) Absent ( n = 42) 51.9 (19) 23 (55%) 9.5 (8) 11 (27%) 16 (38%) 1 (2.4%) 26 (62%) 20 (48%) 3 (7.3%) 3 (14) 5 (24%) p value 0.92 0.69 0.57 0.01* 0.97 0.01* 0.16 0.44 0.43 0.19 0.03* Data presented as n (%) or mean (SD). Serum pepsinogen I concentrations and pepsinogen I/II ratios were available in 26 CVID patients. Statistically significant p values are expressed in italics GI gastrointestinal * p ≤ 0.05 a IM, atrophy or moderate-severe gastritis Fig. 1 The relationship between adverse gastrointestinal histology and age ( a ) and years since diagnosis ( b ) in individuals with CVID. The mean and standard deviations are shown for each histological result
Diarrhea, but Not Upper Gastrointestinal Symptoms, Was Associated with Gastrointestinal Pathology
The presence of upper gastrointestinal symptoms (abdominal pain, nausea, reflux, burping) either individually or as a group was not associated with the presence of gastric IM, atrophy, high-risk histology or FNLH. Interestingly, diarrhea was strongly associated with gastric IM or atrophy, experienced by 10 of the 11 such patients (91%, p < 0.01), but was not specific, with gastric IM or atrophy occurring in 40% of all CVID patients with diarrhea. Diarrhea was not associated with FNLH.
Lower Rate of Detection of Intestinal Metaplasia When Fewer Biopsies Are Taken
There was a lower rate of detection of IM or atrophy in CVID patients who underwent an external gastroscopy, with only one such patient having IM (8.3%) as compared to 10 (20%) of those having a study gastroscopy. This may reflect the fact that only a third of externally performed gastroscopies included extensive sampling biopsies consistent with the study protocol. Two patients did not have any biopsies taken during the gastroscopy and six patients had very few (frequently a single antral biopsy, with no gastric body or duodenal biopsies). Of the 11 CVID individuals with IM and/or atrophy, only 2 (18%) were predicted by the gastroenterologists macroscopically, and changes were seen individually in both the antrum and body, highlighting the importance of a biopsy protocol. Biopsies from the first part of the duodenum did not add any additional information to performing a biopsy on the second part alone.
Increased Prevalence of Focal Nodular Lymphoid Hyperplasia and Lymphoma in the CVID Group
FNLH, defined as the presence of multiple small nodules macroscopically in the duodenum, corresponding to multiple lymphoid aggregates with germinal centers microscopically, is a lesion associated with gastrointestinal lymphoma [ , , ]. FNLH was found in eight (16%) CVID patients, five of which arose from the stomach and three from the duodenum. FNLH was not seen in controls ( p < 0.01). Six of the eight patients with FNLH also had high-risk gastric histology, meaning that in total, 21 CVID patients (42%) had potentially premalignant pathology. Three patients with FNLH (37%) had current H. pylori infection, and this was a significant predictor for the condition ( p = 0.01), along with a low pepsinogen I/II ratio ( p = 0.03). Two patients with FNLH and H. pylori had concurrent Giardia infection. There was no significant difference in smoking history, age, or duration of CVID for patients with FNLH. A gastric B cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma was detected in a 52-year-old female CVID patient via a gastroscopy within the preceding 12 months. She also had FNLH in her duodenum and terminal ileum. Histology and flow cytometry demonstrated a diffuse large B cell lymphoma, clinical stage IVa, with cytopenias and PET-avid lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. Another CVID patient, with a history of intestinal non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma diagnosed and treated in his 40s, had FNLH in his duodenum.
Vitamin D, Vitamin B12, Iron Studies, IgA, and IgM
There was no significant difference in the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency between the CVID and control group (35 vs 23%, p = 0.21). Vitamin B12 deficiency was only present in 3 CVID patients (5.6%) and iron deficiency in 2 (3.6%). None of these were associated with adverse histology. Fifty-eight per cent of CVID patients had low serum IgG, IgA, and IgM at diagnosis, 32% had low IgG and IgA with normal IgM, and 10% had low IgG and IgM with normal IgA. Neither the absence of residual IgA or IgM or serum IgA or IgM concentrations were associated with high-risk histology.
Memory B Cell Classification
Memory B cell classifications did not predict the presence of high-risk gastric histology or FNLH. There appeared to be an increased proportion of patients with FNLH who had an MB1 phenotype (Paris classification) [ ] with reduced switched memory B cells but a normal or increased proportion of non-switched memory B cells (86%, p = 0.01). The true significance of this observation is unclear, given the lack of association with other phenotypic classifications. Increased numbers of CD21 lo cells and switched memory B cell proportions were not significantly correlated with the presence of high-risk gastric histology or FNLH.
Known Monogenic Mutations
The patient with a TACI mutation had previously had undergone a partial gastrectomy for gastric adenocarcinoma; however, her most recent gastroscopy, performed externally, did not include any biopsies. Given her prior gastric adenocarcinoma and therefore her increased risk of adverse histology, biopsies are an essential part of adequate surveillance and will be ensured from this point. The gastroscopy in the patient with an NFKB2 mutation was normal macroscopically and histologically. The patient with an ADA2 mutation had moderate chronic gastric inflammation but no other high-risk histology. She presented with recurrent sinopulmonary infections, pan-hypogammaglobulinemia, cytopenias, and splenomegaly but has not thus far demonstrated other features of ADA2 deficiency, such as vasculopathy, to distinguish her phenotypically from other patients with CVID.
Discussion
This large, prospective study compares gastric pathology in individuals with CVID to controls, assessing not only macroscopic and histological results at gastroscopy but also symptoms and peripheral blood markers. These results demonstrate a much higher than expected prevalence of gastrointestinal lesions with malignant potential in individuals with CVID. Compared to a control population with gastrointestinal symptoms and suspected pathology, the prevalence of moderate to severe non-atrophic gastritis, atrophic gastritis, IM, FNLH, and gastric lymphoma were all higher in the CVID group. Overall, 38% of CVID patients undergoing a screening gastroscopy had one or more of these lesions.
Importantly, the presence of gastric IM or atrophy was independent of upper gastrointestinal symptoms and not predicted by serum vitamin B12 deficiency, H. pylori infection or a reduced pepsinogen I/II ratio. Thus, under previously suggested guidelines, the majority of these patients would not have been eligible for gastroscopy.
The traditional view of the pathogenesis of gastric cancer, particularly intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinoma, has been the Correa cascade: a progression from gastric inflammation initiated by chronic H. pylori infection or other factors, through atrophic gastritis, IM, and subsequent dysplasia and cancer [ ]. It is now understood that although this progression occurs in many cases, diffuse-type gastric cancer may arise directly from chronic H. pylori infection without requiring atrophic gastritis or intestinal metaplasia as precursor lesions [ ]. H. pylori infection is the primary risk factor for gastric cancer in Asian countries [ ] and may be a significant risk factor in some CVID populations where H. pylori infection is common; however, in our geographic location, H. pylori is less prevalent and therefore unlikely to be the main contributor to risk, as reported in other populations [ ]. Furthermore, the majority of cases of gastric IM or atrophy in this study were not associated with H. pylori , implying additional mechanisms for the development of high-risk pathology in these individuals. Clearly, screening for H. pylori alone is insufficient to predict high-risk gastric pathology in patients with CVID. The lack of sensitivity of the pepsinogen I/II ratio in CVID patients may be explained by differences in the pathogenesis of high-risk gastric pathology in CVID compared to Asian populations, where atrophic gastritis following H. pylori infection is more common.
Chronic gastric mucosal inflammation is considered a key factor in the pathogenesis of gastric cancer, via mechanisms including oxidative stress and activation of transcription factors such as NF-κB [ , , , ]. The prevalence of moderate to severe non-atrophic gastritis in CVID patients therefore represents an independent risk factor for IM and gastric cancer. The cause of non-atrophic gastritis in CVID is unclear, but immune dysregulation may play a role. Other risk factors for IM in high-risk populations include increasing age, type A blood antigens, family history of gastric cancer, dietary factors, and cigarette smoking [ ]. Understanding the pathogenesis of CVID-associated gastric cancer may enable early endoscopic excision of dysplastic or neoplastic lesions.
Cigarette smoking is known to increase the risk of progression of gastric IM to dysplasia, and may also be a risk factor for the development of IM, although data from studies in populations with high gastric cancer risk have been conflicting [ , ]. A history of smoking was observed in 70% of our CVID patients with IM. In individuals with CVID, the combination of smoking and moderate to severe chronic non-atrophic gastritis may add to the cumulative risk of IM and is yet another reason to encourage smoking cessation in these patients.
These results, demonstrating a high prevalence of histological changes with precancerous potential in the CVID population, support the case for endoscopic screening in these patients. Macroscopic assessment at endoscopy correlated poorly with histopathology, even when performed by gastroenterologists with CVID experience, highlighting the importance of taking multiple biopsies in order to detect the microscopic changes that may predict a risk of future gastrointestinal pathology. We would suggest screening endoscopies be performed by individuals with experience in this area. Similarly, analysis of histopathological specimens by a pathologist with experience in CVID is likely to increase the sensitivity of screening.
A protocol for screening CVID patients is outlined in Fig. 2 . We recommend a gastroscopy in individuals with CVID with any of the following risk factors: age greater than 50, CVID diagnosis more than 10 years ago, significant smoking history, family history of gastric carcinoma, persistent diarrhea or upper gastrointestinal symptoms, previous gastroscopy with inadequate biopsies, positive H. pylori breath test, iron deficiency, and low serum vitamin B12. Our data suggest that peripheral blood biomarkers alone are insufficient for screening, and that gastroscopy with biopsies is essential in those at high risk. The focus on gastrointestinal screening in CVID has largely revolved around prevention of gastric cancer, yet patients with CVID also have an increased risk of gastrointestinal lymphoma. Focal and diffuse nodular lymphoid hyperplasias are considered to be risk factors for intestinal lymphoma, both with and without immunodeficiency [ , , ]. We therefore suggest that all CVID patients have multiple biopsies from the second part of the duodenum in addition to the gastric antrum and body. The association between FNLH and chronic infection with pathogens including Giardia and H. pylori provides further impetus to effectively treat these infections in patients with CVID. We would favor validation of this screening protocol in a larger prospective cohort. Fig. 2 Proposed gastric screening protocol for individuals with CVID. FNLH: focal nodular lymphoid hyperplasia. “Pack year” refers to the number of packs of cigarettes smoked per day multiplied by the number of years the person smoked
Longitudinal data would be required to determine the rate of progression of focal IM to dysplasia or carcinoma in CVID. Individuals with IM in the general population require regular surveillance; however, consensus regarding the optimal surveillance protocol has not yet been achieved [ ]. Studies have demonstrated a higher rate of progression to gastric cancer in those with more extensive IM lesions in both high- and intermediate-risk populations [ , , ]. While it is clear that dysplasia is a greater risk for progression to carcinoma than IM alone, factors increasing the risk of progression of IM in the general population are still being elucidated, with older age, ethnicity, and smoking all being potential risk factors [ ]. Furthermore, the risk of progression of IM to gastric cancer appears to be greater in populations with high gastric cancer prevalence [ , , ].
Limitations of this study include potential selection bias for individuals with gastrointestinal symptoms in those agreeing to proceed to endoscopy; however, only ten CVID patients across all sites declined participation, so this would not have significantly affected the results. The demographics of our cohort of individuals with CVID were notable for an absence of patients of Asian heritage, which differs markedly from the general population of Sydney, but is consistent with previous data demonstrating a reduced prevalence of CVID in Asian populations [ , ]. A high prevalence of diarrhea in CVID patients was identified, and further investigation for opportunistic infection and lower gastrointestinal tract pathology would be informative.
There is a high prevalence of gastrointestinal lesions with premalignant potential in individuals with CVID. Asian countries with a similarly increased population risk have adopted formalized screening protocols, with proven reduction in cases of advanced gastric cancer. Given the elevated risk of gastric adenocarcinoma and gastrointestinal lymphoma in CVID, we recommend screening gastroscopies in these individuals to detect early changes and similarly reduce the risk of advanced disease.