Introduction
In 1937, the German pediatrician Dr. Alfred Wiskott described a new familial form of thrombocytopenia that he had observed in three brothers who presented early after birth with bloody diarrhea, petechiae, eczema, and recurrent upper respiratory tract infections and who succumbed early in life to intestinal bleeding and infections [ ]. Such description was remarkably similar to the observations later made in 1954 by Dr. Robert Aldrich, an American pediatrician who cared for a boy hospitalized with bloody diarrhea, petechiae, pyoderma, and splenomegaly and who died of intestinal bleeding and sepsis at 10 months of age. Importantly, Dr. Aldrich’s patient was found to belong to a family of Dutch origins in which 15 other male infants from three generations had suffered and died from complications of the same syndrome of “draining ears, eczema and bloody diarrhea”. Noting that the female members of the family appeared to transmit the disease without suffering from it, Dr. Aldrich established the X-linked recessive mode of inheritance of the disease [ ]. By the early 1960s, the disease had come to be referred to as the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) and several new cases had been described throughout the USA and Europe. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, respectively, the mapping and subsequent identification of the gene responsible for WAS [ , , ] marked the beginning of an increasing scientific interest in the biological bases of the disease, which has persisted until today. This review summarizes the current knowledge of the clinical, molecular, and pathophysiological features of this multifaceted and challenging disease.
Clinical Features
In the USA and Canada, the incidence of WAS has been estimated at ~ 1:250,000 male births [ ]. While the diagnosis of WAS can be delayed well into adulthood, especially in the milder cases, the clinical presentation generally occurs within the very first months to years of life [ , , ]. The presentation of WAS is exquisitely heterogeneous. While most patients suffer from thrombocytopenia and susceptibility to infections, the other clinical complications of the disease (i.e., eczema, autoimmunity, and malignancy) can be variably present and differently characterize the phenotype and the severity of the clinical picture. As an effort to standardize the clinical description of affected individuals, a 5-point severity score has been developed and is often used to differentiate patients with milder presentation (and a clinical score up to 2) from those with severe, “classic” WAS phenotype (clinical score of 3–5), based on the severity of infections and the coexistence of severe eczema and/or autoimmune complications and/or malignancy [ , ]. WAS patients with milder pathological manifestations are usually referred to as being affected with “X-linked thrombocytopenia” or XLT, a remnant term preceding the determination of the genetic cause of WAS and used to distinguish what was considered to be an independent nosological entity [ , , ]. Such nomenclature remains commonly used by expert clinicians and scientists and reflects the different clinical phenotypes that can be determined by mutations in the WAS gene and that are often associated to different outcomes. However, because XLT patients can develop severe clinical manifestations of the disease, such as autoimmunity and malignancies, efforts to abandon the use of the XLT definition have been launched in order raise awareness that even WAS patients with milder clinical features are to be carefully monitored in a longitudinal fashion. For this reason, it is the preference of this author not to use the term XLT in this manuscript, but to refer to the different clinical presentations of WAS simply as “mild” or “severe,” keeping in mind that patients with initial mild phenotype can transition to severe conditions upon development of chronic or life-threatening clinical problems.
In the face of the severe possible complications of the disease, it is not surprising that the expectancy of life is reduced in patients with severe WAS. However, even in the absence of resolutive treatment (such as allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation), survival has increased from the maximum of 31 months described by Aldrich in 1954 [ ] to adulthood, thanks to modern prophylactic and treatment modalities. Of note, in the case of WAS with milder clinical presentations, overall survival has been observed to be only slightly lower than that of the general male population [ ].
Thrombocytopenia
Low numbers of circulating platelets are the hallmark of the disease and translate in spontaneous and/or post-traumatic bleeding episodes that are the most common presenting signs of WAS [ , ]. These complications vary in severity from petechiae to severe hematomas and to life-threatening intracerebral or intestinal hemorrhages. Although rare exceptions have been described [ , , , , ], typically, WAS platelets are of small volume, which has been considered a pathognomonic sign of the diseases. The mechanisms leading to the thrombocytopenia have long been debated and appear to be multifactorial. While megakaryocytes are normal or increased in numbers in the bone marrow of WAS patients and show normal platelet production in vitro [ ], platelet turnover studies have revealed evidence of ineffective thrombopoiesis in vivo [ ]. These last findings are consistent with the fact that, while thrombocytopenic, WAS patients do not present increased levels of reticulated platelets and show low immature platelet fractions [ , , , ], which, in addition to recent experiments showing defective proplatelet formation from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from WAS patients [ ], supports the general notion that WAS is associated to inefficient platelet production. On the other hand, several lines of evidence have proven that accelerated peripheral destruction is also responsible for the thrombocytopenia in WAS. Perhaps the most convincing argument is that normal platelet counts are achieved in nearly all cases after splenectomy [ , ]. Studies of platelets from WAS patients have shown that ex vivo phagocytosis by macrophages is increased in comparison to that of normal control platelets [ ]. Based on these and other observations, it is generally accepted that intrinsic defects of WAS platelets augment their phagocytosis by the reticulo-endothelial system in the spleen and bone marrow, thus reducing their survival [ , , ]. Importantly, anti-platelets antibodies can also be detected in WAS patients and are often associated to particularly severe case of thrombocytopenia [ ]. Whether or not WAS platelets are functionally impaired has been controversial, with contrasting results perhaps due to the fact that most platelets function tests depend on platelet numbers and size, both of which are variably affected in WAS. Reduced adhesiveness of WAS platelets to collagen fibers and diminished ability to modulate membrane glycoprotein in response to thrombin has been reported [ , ]. At the same time, flow cytometry assessments of platelet activation found it to be proportional to platelet surface and not to differ from controls [ ]. Similarly, aggregation responses of WAS platelet have been reported both as depressed and normal in different studies [ , ]. In summary, while intrinsic functional platelet defects can be documented in WAS, their relevance to the bleeding complications of the disease remain unclear.
Immunodeficiency
WAS patients are susceptible to increased infection risk by bacterial, viral, and fungal agents. Bacterial otitis medias, sinusitis, and pneumonias are common, as are impetigo, cellulitis, and abscesses. Other frequently reported bacterial episodes include enterocolitis and urinary tract infections, as well as meningitis and sepsis. Viral infections from VZV, HSV, EBV, CMV, and HPV can be extremely severe. Opportunistic infections can also present under the form of extensive candidiasis and molluscum contagiosum infections, aspergillosis, and Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonias [ , , ].
The wide range of pathogens that can cause disease in WAS patients can be explained by the fact that numerous of the cellular components of both branches of the immune system have been described to be severely affected in these patients.
Indeed, cells of the innate immune system, such as monocytes and macrophages show markedly reduced chemotactic responses and phagocytic abilities in WAS [ , , , ]. In addition, neutrophils from WAS patients show defective adhesion/arrest function and reduced integrin-induced respiratory burst [ ], while WAS dendritic cells have reduced cell motility and defective ability to produce a stable and functional immunological synapse with T and NK cells [ , , ]. Finally, extensive studies of NK cells from WAS patients have identified a number of abnormalities, including decreased integrin-mediated migration, disorganized immune synapse, and reduced target cell lysis [ , , , ]. Taken together, these findings substantiate the presence of a combined deficiency of multiple cellular components of innate immunity in WAS, which, in addition to infections, may also underline the susceptibility of affected subjects to autoimmunity and malignancies.
With regards to adaptive immunity, phenotypic and functional defects have been shown to affect multiple T and B cell subsets in patients with WAS. WAS T lymphocytes show abnormalities in numbers and function that impair cellular immunity and account for the increased susceptibility of affected patients to intracellular pathogens. T cell lymphopenia is common and concerns naïve more than memory T cells, and CD8 T cells in particular. Low T cell numbers can be present from early in life, thus suggesting reduced thymic output [ ], although the described increased tendency to spontaneous apoptosis can be a contributing factor [ ]. Of note, circulating T cells acquire oligoclonality in older WAS patients possibly due to homeostatic T cell proliferation in response to lymphopenia [ , ]. However, recent analysis of TRBV gene usage has shown that, using sensitive next-generation sequencing technology, skewed T cell receptor repertoire, with abundance of clonotypic expansions within memory CD4+ cells and in the entire CD8+ cell compartment, can be detected starting in the pediatric age [ ].
By scanning electron microscopy, WAS T cells show reduced numbers of surface microvilli [ ] and, when stimulated in vitro via T cell receptor cross-linking (i.e., anti-CD3 antibodies), they fail to upregulate surface activation markers (e.g., CD69), proliferate, migrate toward chemoattractants, such as SDF-1, and produce interleukin-2 (IL-2) [ , ]. In addition, activated WAS T cells generate disorganized immunological synapses with consequent anomalous synaptic signaling [ , ]. Among important T cell subsets, WAS patients appear to have a defective compartment of peripheral blood CXCR5 + CD4 + T follicular helper cells (Tfh) that are less competent than normal Tfh cells in supporting in vitro IgG production [ ].
These latter findings may help explain the humoral immunodeficiency that is characteristic of the syndrome and that presents with dysgammaglobulinemia (low levels of IgM and isohemagglutinins, elevated serum IgA) and insufficient response to vaccinations, especially when unconjugated pneumococcal antigens are used [ , ]. On the other hand, intrinsic defects of B lymphocyte development and differentiation are also predominant in WAS and are likely directly contributory to the reduced protection from infections. Indeed, clinical observations have shown that the composition of bone marrow B cell precursors is altered in WAS patients with decreased frequency of immature B cells [ ]. Absolute peripheral B lymphocyte counts can be found below the normal range in children with WAS, while B cell numbers are mostly normal in adult patients. The distribution of peripheral B cell subsets can vary, with transitional and mature naïve B cells that can be normal in numbers or, respectively, increased and decreased compared to age-matched healthy donors. Memory B cells are often decreased especially in older patients, while CD21 low B lymphocytes, a naïve-like, partially autoreactive B cell subset, are expanded [ , , ]. In addition to these distribution abnormalities, B lymphocytes from WAS patients show defective maturation features, such as significantly lower somatic hypermutation frequency, skewed rearrangements of immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region genes, and preferential usage of immunoglobulin gamma 3 heavy chain constant region (Cγ3) genes [ , ]. While the underlying mechanisms are unclear, it is reasonable to speculate that these anomalies may result in reduced antibody diversification with consequent inefficient pathogens clearance and tendency to infections, but also chronic inflammation conditions that can lead to breakdown of tolerance and result in autoimmune disease.
Autoimmunity
Autoimmune disorders are diagnosed in up to ~ 70% of WAS patients [ , ] and complicate allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HCT) outcome in > 20% of cases [ , ]. Autoimmune cytopenias (including hemolytic anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia) are the complications most commonly reported, followed by arthritis, vasculitis, inflammatory bowel disease (presenting either as Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis), and immune-mediated renal disease, such as IgA nephropathy and Henoch-Schönlein purpura. However, a multitude of autoimmune complications affecting other organs and tissues such as the skin, muscle, eye, and liver have also been described [ , , , ].
The mechanisms underlying autoimmunity in WAS have been extensively investigated. Early studies focused on the characterization of quantitative and qualitative defects of CD4+CD25+FOXP3+ natural regulatory T cells (nTreg) and showed that WAS patients can generate normal numbers of nTreg cells that, however, fail to adequately suppress proliferation of autologous and allogeneic CD4+ effector T cells in vitro [ , ]. Given the critical role played by this type of regulatory cells in maintaining peripheral tolerance by suppressing autoreactive effector T cells [ , ], these findings suggest that dysfunction of nTreg cells may play a role in the high susceptibility of WAS patients to autoimmune disorders. More recently, the presence of IL-10-secreting, regulatory B cells (B10 cells) has also been investigated, which has shown a reduction of such cells in WAS patients [ , ]. Although the role of B10 cells in human disease is not yet clearly defined, it can be speculated that decreased numbers of these regulatory cells can also contribute to the establishment or maintenance of autoimmune disorders in WAS.
Autoantibody-mediated complications (e.g., autoimmune cytopenias) are among the most commonly observed autoimmune diseases in WAS patients [ , ]. These clinical observations and the finding that multireactive autoantibodies are commonly found in the serum of WAS patients [ ] have suggested that the mechanisms of selection of self-tolerant B lymphocytes may be defective in this disease. Indeed, detailed molecular studies of the early steps of B cell differentiation have shown that mature naïve B lymphocytes from WAS patients contain an increased frequency of clones that express autoreactive antibodies (e.g., ANAs, anti-dsDNA, anti-insulin) and exhibit an increased usage of the VH4-34 immunoglobulin heavy chain gene segment, known to encode autoantibodies. Such enrichment of autoreactive specificities is not observed among bone marrow new emigrant B cells, which indicates that the defects of B cell tolerance in WAS specifically affect the differentiation step from new emigrant/transitional B cells to the naïve B cell stage [ , ]. The mechanisms responsible for the defective deletion or positive selection of autoreactive B cells in WAS remain unclear. On the one hand, the hyper-responsiveness of WAS B cells to B cell receptor (BCR) triggering and Toll-like receptor (TLR) stimulation [ ] and the increased circulating levels of B cell activating factor (BAFF) observed in WAS patients [ , ] may result in selection of B cells containing autoreactive clones. On the other, given the role of regulatory T cells in the peripheral B cell tolerance checkpoint [ ], it is also possible that the abovementioned impairment of nTreg function in WAS may contribute to the survival of autoantibody-producing B cell clones.
IgA nephropathy (IgAN) is one of the common autoimmune complications of WAS being diagnosed in 3.5–19% of cases [ , , ]. At difference with other autoimmune disorders affecting WAS patients, the pathophysiology of IgA nephropathy may not be depending on defective immune regulatory function. Indeed, WAS patients show significant amounts of galactose-deficient IgA and increased levels of IgG-IgA circulating immune complexes [ ] that are thought to have a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of IgAN [ ]. As increased defects of IgA glycosylation are found in the context of T H 2-polarized immune responses [ ], the dysregulation of T H 2 immunity in WAS [ , ] may explain the accumulation of galactose-deficient IgA in this disease and the consequent glomerular deposition of IgG-IgA immune complexes, leading to IgAN.
Atopy
Eczematous rash was a prominent clinical feature of the original descriptions of the disease and remains a very common finding affecting over 80% of patients at some point in life [ ]. This condition can be severe, significantly affect the quality of life of WAS patients and expose to infection complications. Eosinophilia and elevated serum levels of IgE are often accompanying signs and, generally, the historical and physical characteristics of the lesions fit the diagnostic criteria of atopic dermatitis. The underlying mechanisms remain unclear, but it can be hypothesized that dendritic cell dysfunction and unbalanced T H 2 immunity may play a role in damaging skin barrier function [ , , ].
Allergic rhinitis, asthma, and food allergy-related diseases are also observed in patients with WAS [ , ]. In pediatric WAS patients, increased prevalence of allergic responses against common food antigens (e.g., peanuts, shrimp, milk, egg white, wheat) has been described together with higher rates of food allergy diagnosis compared to the general population. Defective suppression function of WAS regulatory T cells on T H 2 effector cells, leading IgE-mediated sensitization to food allergens, has been invoked as explanatory mechanism for these findings [ ].
Malignancy
The possibility of cancer occurrence is a significant concern for WAS patients. Indeed, prevalence of malignancy as high as 13–22% has been reported in retrospective studies of patients with severe clinical presentation that have also shown an average age of onset of 9.5 years and an increased risk for patients who had suffered from an autoimmune disease [ , ]. Lymphomas, predominantly of the non-Hodgkin type and often EBV-induced, are the most frequently diagnosed form of neoplasm [ , ] and present in extranodal sites with a characteristically high frequency. Lymphoblastic leukemias, myelodysplasia, myeloproliferative disorders, and other non-lymphoreticular malignancies (e.g., seminoma, testicular carcinoma, glioma, neuroma, and Kaposi sarcoma) have also been described [ , , , ].
As mentioned above, WAS patients with milder clinical presentation can also develop malignancies. However, a retrospective study on a large cohort of WAS patients with clinical score of 1–2 suggested that risk may be reduced compared to that of patients with severe phenotype, as the prevalence of malignancy was observed at 5% and median age at presentation was increased at 34.0 years [ ].
A level of complexity is added by the propensity of WAS patients to develop benign lymph node enlargements characterized histologically by follicular reactive hyperplasia that are a frequent cause of anxiety and need to be thoroughly investigated.
As for other forms of immunodeficiency, the increased incidence of cancer can be attributed to the concept of aberrant immune surveillance. In the case of WAS, several of the above-described aberrations affecting dendritic cells, T lymphocytes, and NK cells can result in defective elimination of altered cells (e.g., virally infected) and/or defective immunity toward cancer cells, which may facilitate the origination and progression of neoplasms. Interestingly, cytotoxic cell lines originated from patients with WAS display strongly reduced lytic activity against lymphoma cells, likely due to disorganized immunological synapse formation and incomplete polarization perforin-containing lytic granules toward tumoral targets [ ], which offers a possible mechanism contributing to development of hematological malignancies in WAS patients.
Genetic and Molecular Aspects
The WAS Gene
The WAS gene was initially mapped to the short arm of the X-chromosome [ , ] and identified by positional cloning in 1994 [ ]. Soon thereafter, it was determined that patients affected with X-linked thrombocytopenia also carried mutation in the WAS gene [ , ]. The gene is organized in 12 exons and encodes a highly proline-rich sequence of 502 amino acid residues named the WAS protein, WASp (Fig. 1 ) [ ]. More than 400 different genetic mutations have been described that are scattered throughout the gene sequence, although as many as nine mutational “hot spots” have also been identified that account for about one third of the total number of reported mutations [ ]. Missense mutations are the most common type of genetic lesions to be detected, are mostly located in exons 1–4, and are generally compatible with residual expression of WASp. The latter observation may explain the fact that WAS patients with milder phenotype often carry missense mutations in the 2nd or 3rd exon of the WAS gene [ , ]. Splice site aberrations are the second most common group of mutations and are more commonly located in the in the 3′ half of the gene. The effects of this type of mutations on the expression of WASp are variable, as it is the phenotype of the patients who carry them and who can present with mild or severe manifestations. Of note, a retrospective study found that WAS patients carrying splice site mutations presented with the highest incidence of lymphomas, compared to kindreds with other types of genetic lesions [ ]. Nonsense mutations, insertions, and deletions are also distributed along the WAS gene and generally results in abrogation of WASp expression associated to severe clinical phenotype. Large deletions resulting in complete lack of WASp expression have also been described in a few cases [ , , ]. Fig. 1 Top: schematic representation of the WAS gene and its organization in 12 exons. Bottom: schematic representation of the WAS protein (WASp) and its functional domains. Dashed lines indicate the portions of WASp that are encoded by each exon of the WAS gene. EVH1, Enables/Vasp Homology 1; B, Basic region; GBD, GTPase Binding Domain; PRD, Proline-Rich Domain; V, Verprolin homology domain; C, Central hydrophobic region; A, Acidic region
Four missense mutations (L270P, S272P, I276S, and I294T) located in exon 9 of the WAS gene have been demonstrated to result in dysregulated activation of WASp resulting in a clinical phenotype characterized by congenital neutropenia and myelodysplasia and a presentation profoundly different from that of WAS. This condition has been named X-linked neutropenia (XLN) and is described in detail elsewhere [ ].
The WAS Protein
WASp is the founding member of a family of actin nucleation-promoting factors including molecules such as N-WASP and WAVE1-3 that translate surface signals into actin polymerization through the actin-related protein, Arp2/3 complex. The important role of WASp in actin polymerization and cytoskeletal remodeling can explain the several abnormalities observed in patient cells (e.g., paucity in number and aberrant structure of microvilli and podosomes, reduced cell motility and migration, abnormal secretory granules, disorganized immune synapse, and reduced phagocytosis) and can be invoked to understand many of the clinical features of the syndrome.
WASp is only expressed in hematopoietic cells and is organized in a series of functional domains: the N-terminal EVH1 (Enables/Vasp Homology 1), followed by the GBD (GTPase Binding Domain), the PRD (Proline-Rich Domain) regions, and the C-terminal VCA (Verprolin homology domain, Central hydrophobic region, Acidic region) domain (Fig. 1 ). Through the VCA domain, WASp associates with and delivers G-actin to the Arp2/3 complex. In resting conditions, the VCA domain interacts with the GBD region and is not available to the Arp2/3 complex. Upon cell activation, binding of Cdc42-GTP to the GBD results in release of the VCA domain, thus mediating actin polymerization. The PRD domain also mediates WASp activation and regulation by binding to protein tyrosine kinases (FYN, LCK, HCK), adaptor (NCK, CRKL), cytoskeletal (PSTPIP1, profiling), and endocytic proteins (SNX9, intersectin). Through the EVH1 domain, WASp binds to the WASp-Interacting Protein (WIP), which regulates its stability, by preventing post-translational degradation [ ].
In addition to its actin-binding and polymerization function, WASp has a role in the nucleus where it participates in the transcription of TBX21 , the gene encoding the key regulator of T H 1 immune responses, T-BET [ ]. The nuclear function of WASp is mediated by WASp nuclear import and export domains that have been identified within the basic region (B) upstream of the GBD, and the EVH1 domain, respectively (Fig. 1 ). Importantly, the nuclear involvement of WASp appears to be uncoupled from the VCA-mediated cytoplasmic role in actin polymerization [ ], which supports the notion that mutations in different portions of the molecule can be responsible for different clinical manifestation of the disease.
Somatic Mosaicism
A high frequency of spontaneous reversion events in WAS patients resulting in somatic mosaicism and presence of WASp-expressing cells in their circulation has been documented [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. Revertant cells have been detected among T and B lymphocytes, as well as NK cells with variable prevalence from ~ 1 to up to ~ 80% of the specific subset population. The reversion events can result in true back-mutations, non-synonymous changes, or second site mutations that restore the reading frame effectively removing the consequences of the original mutations. Cloning efforts have demonstrated that a wide variety of different revertant genotypes (up to 34) can be found in WAS individuals carrying genetic lesions located in specific genomic locations that appear to be particularly prone to mutation activity [ ].
The mechanisms underlying the reversion events and their potential multiple occurrences in WAS patients remain unclear. WASp-deficiency is not known to increase DNA polymerase errors or reduce DNA repair activity, and the general mutation rate does not appear to be increased in WAS patients [ ]. Therefore, similar to other primary immunodeficiencies in which somatic mosaicism has been observed (e.g., ADA-SCID, X-SCID, RAG1/2-deficiency, leukocyte adhesion deficiency, CD3ζ-deficiency), WASp-expressing revertant cells may simply be generated by stochastic events and be selected as a result of survival advantage over mutated, WASp-defective counterparts. The seemingly increased frequency of spontaneous revertant events in WAS may reflect the fact that the clinical history of WAS patients often allows their long-term management in the absence of resolutive treatment, which, at difference with other forms of primary immunodeficiency, may allow sufficient time for revertant cells of varied genotype to individually accumulate.
It is important to note that the finding of revertant, WASp-expressing circulating lymphocytes is not necessarily associated to, nor predict a milder clinical form of the disease. While several cases of WAS patients with somatic mosaicism presented with a phenotype that was milder than expected based on their mutation, in many cases, the presence of revertant cells did not prevent the occurrence of severe and lethal complications [ , , ].
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of WAS should be suspected in any boy presenting with thrombocytopenia, isolated or accompanied by eczema and/or repeated respiratory infections, autoimmunity, and/or cancer. A confirmatory diagnostic workup will reveal a series of characteristic findings that are described below.
Hemogram
The most relevant value is obviously the platelet count that in the vast majority of WAS cases will show thrombocytopenia of varied degree. It is important to note that cases have been reported where the thrombocytopenia has been intermittent, which can hinder the diagnostic process [ , ]. Reduced platelet volume is also a characteristic finding. Of note, MPV is a parameter often difficult to measure in moderate to severe thrombocytopenia [ ], and, therefore, this specific piece of information may not be available. Review of a blood smear remains therefore an important component of the diagnostic process.
The lack of an increased immature platelet fraction (IPF) in the face of thrombocytopenia is also common in WAS and can be used as part of the application of a prediction rule that supports further investigation for the diagnosis of WAS if the sum of the platelet counts (in K/μl) and the percentage of IPF multiplied by 75 returns a value < 500 [ ]. Other findings from the complete blood count test that may be relevant include anemia and neutropenia that may be indicative of autoimmunity, as well as lymphopenia, especially in the youngest patients [ ].
Immune Function Studies
Flow cytometry analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations often shows a wide variety of abnormalities including low CD8 T cell counts and may reveal reduced numbers of B lymphocytes in children with WAS and lower proportions of memory B cells in adult WAS patients [ , , , ]. TREC and KREC copy numbers can be reduced in blood spots obtained from WAS patients after birth [ ], thus making the identification of some cases through newborn screening programs theoretically possible, although, to date, no diagnosis of WAS has resulted from the prospective application of such analytical tests [ ]. Investigations of humoral immunity often show low levels of IgM and isohemagglutinines and elevated IgAs, in the face of normal IgG concentrations. Antibody titers to childhood immunization are usually normal, while responses to unconjugated pneumococcal antigens are typically defective. Lymphocyte proliferation assays show normal responses to mitogens like PHA, PWM, and Con-A, and antigens, such as tetanus toxoid and candida. However, proliferation responses of TcR cross-linking (e.g., with anti-CD3 antibodies) are characteristically depressed.
WASp Expression
Investigations of WASp expression in peripheral blood leukocytes by intracellular staining and flow cytometry provide a quick way to establish a diagnosis of WAS when the result show complete lack of WASp detection. On the other hand, the interpretation of the results may be less straightforward when residual, but abnormal levels of WASp are revealed. The suspected diagnosis of WAS based on abnormal flow cytometry study results needs to be confirmed by genetic analysis. One important advantage of flow cytometry studies is that this technology allows for easy identification of cell populations with different levels of WASp expression, which can identify the presence of revertant somatic mosaicism. Unfortunately, while their availability is expanding, the flow cytometry-based assessment of WASp expression remains a specialized test that may not be easily available in many geographical areas. WASp expression can be also studied by western blot analysis, that, however, is a more laborious method and is generally reserved for specific research purposes.
Mutation Analysis
Determination of a specific mutation in the WAS gene is essential for a definitive diagnosis of WAS. Direct interrogation of the patient DNA using the classical Sanger sequencing method is easily accessible and will identify variants in the 12 exons and intron/exon boundaries of the WAS gene.
Negative results in the face of very suggestive clinical and laboratory evidence may warrant expanding the search of mutations to other less commonly affected genomic locations, such as the WAS proximal and distal promoter regions. The presence of somatic mosaicism leading to contamination of the sample studied with cells carrying reversion events should also be excluded. Finally, because WIP deficiency mimics the clinical and laboratory features of WAS [ ], mutations in the WIP gene may also need to be suspected.
Clinical Management
The management approach of patients affected with WAS is tailored to their specific clinical manifestations and degree of severity. Allogeneic HCT has long been performed to restore normal immunity in WAS patients and has proven to be potentially curative. More recently, transplantation of autologous gene-corrected hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (gene therapy) has become an alternative, albeit still investigational, option. On the other hand, supportive treatment measures aimed at managing the individual clinical manifestations of WAS cases with milder phenotype for whom the risks of definitive treatment options are judged to be too high, or for those patients awaiting HCT or gene therapy, are of paramount importance to preserve the quality of life and allow early identification of complications with potential for long-lasting or lethal sequelae.
Supportive Clinical Management
The management of the risks deriving from the thrombocytopenia can be complicated. Counseling on prevention of traumas potentially leading to severe bleeding episodes through the adoption of environmental precaution measures (house proofing against falling, climbing, and grabbing) and the use of protection devices (e.g., helmets) during the toddler and childhood years should be provided. Avoidance of high-contact, high-risk sports should be recommended. Active bleeding episodes should be medically managed in an urgent fashion to allow for adequate interventions, which may include antifibrinolytic drugs and platelet transfusions. High-dose immune globulins, short-course steroid treatments, and B lymphocyte depletion have all been used to increase platelet counts during episodes of transitory fluctuations that can occur in WAS patients with variable benefit. The use of prophylactic transfusions to maintain the platelet counts within a determined range is discouraged, as it can result in the development of anti-HLA antibodies with consequent reduction of transfusion efficacy in case of emergency and possible negative impact on the chances of successful engraftment of a future HCT. Thrombopoietin receptor agonists approved for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (eltrombopag, romiplostim) are being used in WAS patients with mixed results. In the only formal study executed to date, 5 out of 8 WAS patients who were treated with eltrombopag were considered responders, as they achieved the count of 50,000 platelets/μl at least once and doubled the baseline counts over the follow-up period of at least 24 weeks [ ]. Eltrombopag has been also used to manage severely thrombocytopenia in WAS while waiting for definitive treatment [ ]. It seems fair to conclude that the use to thrombopoietic agents can be considered among the options available to physicians treating WAS patients, although their efficacy is not universal and the long-term possible risks not yet fully known. Splenectomy is an effective way to increase platelet numbers [ ], but exposes WAS patients to serious infection complications [ ], a risk that can be increased in patients who go on to receive HCT due to the myeloablative and immunosuppressive regimens associated with the procedure [ , ]. As such, the recommendation to perform splenectomy need to be pondered in view of the improvement of quality of life that can be expected and the patient’s prospects to undergo HCT, and strictly followed by the institution of life-long penicillin prophylaxis.
Prevention and prompt treatment of infections is one of the pillars of an effective management of WAS patients. The decision to begin chemoprophylaxis and whether or not it should include anti-viral and/or antifungal medications depends on the frequency, severity, and type of infections suffered by the individual patients. Similar considerations apply to the recommendation to institute replacement immune globulin treatment (intravenous or subcutaneous). Of note, because of the qualitative abnormalities of immune globulin production in WAS, the finding of normal serum IgG levels should not influence this decision.
Autoimmune complications require immunosuppression treatment, which can be challenging in view of the immunodeficient status of WAS patients. Autoimmune cytopenias are managed with high-dose corticosteroids often in combination with other immunosuppressive drugs (e.g., cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, vincristine), intravenous immune globulins, or B cell depletion with rituximab [ , , ]. Combination of immunosuppressive agents (corticosteroids, cyclosporine) is usually needed for the initial treatment of vasculitis and arthritis [ ], although treatment can be often reduced gradually to only low-dose steroids. Inflammatory bowel disease in WAS can be extremely severe and, while it can be treated as Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis, according to the clinical presentation, its definitive management is often only achieved after HCT.
With regard to the atopic manifestations of WAS, the same principles and approaches used in the general population apply to the management of allergic rhinitis, asthma, and food allergy-related diseases. The treatment of eczematous dermatitis also follows common strategies based on the use of topical emollients and corticosteroids. Also borrowing from the studies in the general population [ ], disinfectant baths (e.g., sodium hypochlorite, vinegar) are often recommended and can be beneficial. Careful vigilance about the possibility of bacterial or fungal superinfection of severe eczema conditions remains important.
Based on the notion that deficient IL-2 production by WAS lymphocytes can contribute to the susceptibility of WAS patients to severe viral infections and malignancy, Jyonuchi and collaborators have investigated the potential benefits of IL-2 administration in WAS and found that a low dose of 0.5 million U/m 2 /day was well tolerated and resulted in a statistical significant increase of platelet numbers by the end of the 6-month trial period. The authors speculated that an increase in regulatory T cell function secondary to IL-2 therapy may help control autoimmune platelet destruction in WAS, but cautioned that additional confirmatory studies will be required [ ].
Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
Allogeneic HCT can cure all aspects of the disease. This approach was first attempted in 1968 [ ] and later reported as a successful therapeutic option in 1978 [ ]. As for other forms of primary immunodeficiencies, the results of HCT have improved over the years and the overall survival in large retrospective series has been recently reported to be ~ 90% at 5 years and ~ 75–80% at 8–10 years after HCT [ , , ]. These and other reports have also indicated how factors such as patient clinical characteristics (e.g., age and severity of disease) and type of donor available are expected to influence the outcome of HCT. For example, HCT from umbilical cord blood and mismatched related donors is associated to lower overall survival [ , , ]. With regard to haploidentical donors, new graft manipulation approaches that minimize the risk of graft versus host disease (GvHD) and maximize the chances of successful engraftment and prompt immune reconstitution have been recently applied to WAS with promising results [ ]. Older age at the time of transplant has been also associated with worse overall survival, with different studies indicating different thresholds (e.g., age < 2 or < 5 years) [ , ].
Despite the excellent likelihood of survival after HCT, transplanted WAS patients are exposed to post-HCT complications among which autoimmunity is a particularly prominent problem. Indeed, up to 55% of transplanted WAS subjects have been reported to develop autoimmune manifestations that consisted mostly of autoantibody-mediated cytopenias [ , , , ]. The reasons underlying these complications are unclear, but, since they have been observed in subjects with lower degree of donor chimerism [ , ], it has been postulated that they may be sustained by the persistence of host-derived dysregulated immune cells.
Although the outcome of HCT is burdened by a defined risk of mortality, there is general consensus that WAS patients with severe phenotype (clinical score 3 and above) should be transplanted. For WAS patients with milder clinical manifestations, however, there is no unanimous opinion and the decision to proceed to HCT is taken on a case-by-case basis. Relevant to the decision-making process are the results of a retrospective review of the outcome of HCT in a cohort of 24 milder WAS patients transplanted at different centers worldwide between 1990 and 2011. The study revealed a survival rate of ~ 83% in the absence of long-term complications [ ]. While these results appear less favorable than those described above for WAS patients in general, it is worth noting that this study did not segregate cases by year of treatment and therefore it did not reflect the improvement of HCT achieved in recent years.
Gene Therapy
On average, HCT from HLA-identical family donors are only available to less than 20% of transplanted WAS patients [ , , , , , ]. Although progress is being made [ ], the increased morbidity and mortality associated with HCT from mismatched donors [ ] justifies the investigation of experimental alternative forms of treatment based on gene therapy. Gene therapy offers several potential advantages over allogeneic HCT, including that it is theoretically available to all patients, that it decreases the risks of graft rejection and avoids the risks of GvHD, which translates in reduced need for and the potential complications of preparative conditioning regimens and post-procedure immunosuppression. Gene therapy for WAS was first applied in a clinical trial carried out in Germany, in which a gamma-retroviral vector was used to correct CD34+ cells from ten WAS patients. Nine of these subjects showed significant increase of platelet counts and restoration of immune responses. Unfortunately, however, seven patients developed acute leukemia associated with vector integration-mediated activation of the LMO2 , MDS1 , or MN1 genes [ , ].
This unacceptable high level of risk of insertional oncogenesis of gamma-retroviral vector-mediated gene therapy prompted the implementation of clinical gene transfer protocols employing constructs based on HIV-1, as vectors with intrinsically less genotoxic characteristics [ ]. A series of clinical trials that use these lentiviral vectors are currently open in Europe and the USA and have generated encouraging initial results. In the first trial that begun in 2010, Italian investigators have treated at least 10 patients (F. Ferrua, personal communication, Barcelona, September 2016) with infusions of gene-corrected bone marrow and/or mobilized peripheral blood CD34+ hematopoietic cells after administration of reduced intensity conditioning with busulfan, fludarabine, and rituximab. The outcome of the first three patients has been described in detail at ≥ 1 year after gene therapy and has shown improvement of platelet counts, immune function, and clinical manifestations of the disease, including a reduction of severe infections and resolution of eczema [ , ]. Studies of the effects of gene therapy on the B cell defects characteristic of WAS have also been performed and have shown that normal distribution of bone marrow and periphery blood B cell subsets, as well as normalization of CD21 low B lymphocytes levels can be obtained in treated patients. Importantly, a significantly decreased in frequency of mature naïve B cell clones expressing autoreactive antibodies was also demonstrated, which translated in improvement of circulating autoantibody levels in all treated patients [ , ]. Finally, analysis of vector integration sites did not show the enrichment of oncogenic targets previously seen in patients from the German trial, thus supporting the increased safety features of the WAS gene therapy lentiviral vector used [ ].
In a second investigation using the same lentiviral vector and a similar preparative chemotherapy regimen, 6 out of 7 patients treated in Paris and London also showed improvement of immune function and clinical manifestations during 6–42 months of follow-up. Importantly, also in this trial no vector-mediated clonal expansions have occurred [ ]. It should be noted that, although bleeding episodes were markedly reduced in numbers and severity in both trials, and treated patients became independent from transfusion and thrombopoietin receptor agonists, reconstitution of normal platelets numbers was not achieved in neither trial, [ , ]. The reasons for this limitation remain unexplained. More recently, a third WAS gene therapy trial using this lentiviral construct was initiated in Boston, MA, USA and, as of December 2015, has enrolled four patients with similar results [ ]. At the same time, other US investigators have generated an alternative lentiviral vector with stronger WASp expression capabilities that is being developed for future clinical applications [ , ]. Finally, WAS gene transfer vectors based on the simian foamy virus, an agent that does not cause human disease and integrates in the cell genome without evident insertional oncogenesis consequences, have been shown to be effective in mouse models of WAS and are awaiting further development [ ].
Based on the current experience, it can be concluded that lentiviral-mediated gene correction of autologous hematopoietic progenitors can result in significant benefit for treated patients and can be considered among the therapeutic alternatives for WAS. Longer observation periods are warranted, however, to determine if this type of gene therapy can offer a definitive cure for affected patients.
Conclusions
Although extensive progress has been made in the understanding of its pathophysiological bases, WAS remains a clinical challenge and a disease that requires a multidisciplinary management approach to best address the multifaceted aspects that may complicate the presentation of affected patients.
In the case of severe manifestations, it is generally straightforward to recommend the path toward definitive therapy with HCT. However, even in a clear clinical situation, HCT may not be easily available depending of the geographical and/or socio-economical situation of the patient, in which case supportive care measures need to be applied in a timely and aggressive fashion. The latter notion clearly applies also to the management of the WAS cases with milder clinical presentation, where the decision to accept the risks of a potentially curing therapeutic approach needs to be balanced with the moderate severity of the disease manifestations. While reliable guidance would derive from randomized trials and prospective studies, these are challenging propositions for rare diseases such as WAS and will require the involvement of consortium-type of enterprises such as PIDTC [ ]. As an alternative effort to generate informative data and treatment recommendations, a large retrospective study is underway, and the results of which are eagerly awaited by the medical and patient communities [ ].
The confirmation of the curative potential of gene therapy for WAS and the expansion of the current inclusion criteria to comprise also WAS patients with milder phenotype is also keenly anticipated. To this regard, the evolution of the field toward the application of gene editing technologies approaches provides some cautious optimism [ ]. At the same time, important efforts will have to be dedicated to improve the current restricted access to gene therapy options due to financial and geographic area limitations.
Finally, an emerging area of concern reflects the increasing reports of platelet deficiencies, as well autoimmune and malignant complications that are observed in female carriers of WAS gene mutations. These problems challenge the notion that X-chromosome inactivation is supposed to erase the effects of the mutated WAS allele in carrier females and will deserve systematic investigation.