“A quick glance at selected topics in this issue” aims to highlight contents of the Journal and provide a quick review to the readers. We realize that many of you do not have time to read all journals or attend all national meetings. For that reason, every issue of the JNC includes 2 types of literature reviews. One summarizing recent key nuclear cardiology articles that have been published in journals other than ours ( ) while the second outlines select publications in the general cardiovascular disease literature that have relevance to our field ( ).
Another entry is the historical corner that looks at the career and scientific contributions of a pioneer in Nuclear Medicine and Radiology, Dr. B. Leonard Holman, MD ( ). These manuscripts are complimented by a great selection of original articles with accompanying editorials, brief reports, a CME review paper (The role of nuclear medicine in assessments of cardiac dyssynchrony, ), ‘What is this image’ and ‘Images that Teach’. Many of the original articles also have power point slides. The abstract of the lead original article ‘Repeatable and reproducible measurements of myocardial oxidative metabolism, blood flow and external efficiency using 11 C-acetate PET’ by Wu and colleagues, has also been translated into Spanish, Chinese, and French in response to requests from the international readership. PowerPoint slides from this paper can be found by searching . The review article by Loffler and Salerno from University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, VA ( ) discusses ‘Cardiac MRI for the comprehensive evaluation of cancer therapeutics-related cardiac dysfunction. Another review article by Russell ( ) looks at the use of nuclear techniques for the evaluation of oncologic cardiotoxicity. The Case Presentation Corner in this issue looks at a case of heart failure resulting from 2 rare entities, ‘Rosai–Dorfman disease and left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy’ ( ). Also included in the issue are highlights of selected noteworthy cardiovascular abstracts from the scientific sessions of the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Philadelphia PA, June 23-26, 2018 ( ). These abstracts competed for the basic and clinical Young Investigator Awards. The present issue also lists the best clinical abstracts and winners of the Young Investigator awards at the ASNC 2018 meeting held in San Francisco September 6-9, 2018 ( ).
Our comments on a few selected papers noted below are therefore only the tip of the iceberg. These manuscripts were selected at random and we sincerely believe all original articles serve a purpose, provide great value and have undergone an intense peer review.
Carbon-11 acetate ( 11 C-acetate) PET is an accurate non-invasive method to measure myocardial oxidative metabolism that has been validated against invasive standards, and used in clinical research studies to estimate the efficiency of the heart in terms of energy consumption used to produce contractile function. However the test-retest repeatability (within subject variability over time) of 11 C-acetate PET imaging and the associated measures of cardiac efficiency have not been reported in humans. Wu and colleagues from University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, Canada, ( ) demonstrate that 11 C-acetate PET measurements of work metabolic index and myocardial external efficiency in 20 stable patients heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), exhibited excellent test-retest repeatability and operator reproducibility. Thus these PET derived measurements are reliable measures to track the progression of disease in stable HFrEF patients, which may be used to monitor the benefits of therapeutic interventions that enhance cardiac efficiency. Another publication by Hansson et al. from Aarhus, Denmark ( ) also confirms the test-retest repeatability of non-invasive measurements of myocardial external efficiency using 11 C-acetate PET in 10 healthy volunteers.
Fluorine-18 FDG PET/CT is a promising tool for the diagnosis of suspected prosthetic heart valve endocarditis (PVE). Some reports advocate later imaging time points to improve the diagnostic accuracy for PVE. Scholtens and colleagues from The Netherlands ( ), compare standard (60 min post injection) and late (150 min post injection) FDG PET/CT images in 13 patients with a clinical suspicion of PVE. The authors’ note that late images were more prone to false positive interpretation on both visual and semi-quantitative analyses and thus recommend using the standard (approximately 60 min post injection) image acquisition in these patients.
Allam et al. ( ) observe the presence of atherosclerosis in the form of arterial calcifications in ≥ 1 vascular bed in 115 of 154 (75%) Egyptian patients on whole-body non-contrast CT scans, whose SPECT-MPI, performed for standard clinical indications, was normal. The calcifications were seen in the iliofemoral (62%), abdominal aorta (53%), thoracic aorta (47%), coronary (47%), and carotid (25%) vascular beds. Extra-coronary atherosclerosis in patients with a zero coronary artery calcium score was also common, occurring in the iliofemoral (42%), abdominal aorta (36%), thoracic aorta (29%), and carotid (7%) vascular territories. Coronary artery calcifications were rarely present without iliofemoral or abdominal aortic calcification. The authors note that atherosclerosis appeared first in the iliofemoral bed and then, in an ascending, “south to north fashion,” involved other arterial beds. They suggest imaging the extra-coronary vascular beds as a sensitive method for identifying pre-clinical coronary atherosclerosis. This group has also previously reported on the patterns of vascular calcifications in mummies from Egypt and other parts of the world, and surprisingly, a similar pattern was found!
Non-invasive 18 F-NaF PET/CT has been used previously to identify high-risk coronary plaques. Marchesseau and colleagues ( ) validate the use of 18 F-NaF PET/CT imaging for the detection of high-risk coronary atheromas and show that 18 F-NaF also binds to myocardial scar tissue using PET/MR. They hypothesize that microcalcifications may be the common factor associated with 18 F-NaF binding to both the disrupted atherosclerotic plaque and myocardial infarct/scar tissue. Thus the authors suggest that 18 F-NaF PET/CT could be potentially used for simultaneous coronary and myocardial imaging applications to quantify the burden of vulnerable plaque and myocardial scar tissue.
On conventional Anger cameras, dual-isotope SPECT-MPI protocols using both Tl-201 and Tc-99m agents are less preferred compared to single-isotope Tc-99m perfusion agents due to the rather high radiation exposure for patients. Imbert et al. from France ( ) do a head-to-head comparison between a low-dose dual-isotope SPECT-MPI with a conventional single-isotope (Tc-99m based) protocol in 102 patients performed on a D-SPECT CZT camera. Mean effective dose was 8.3 mSv for dual-isotope procedure and 5.7 mSv for the low stress only cases with normal perfusion. The dual-isotope protocol however had the disadvantage of a higher radiation dose than that of the low-dose stress-rest single-isotope procedure on CZT cameras (< 5 mSv) and also required adapting to a higher noise level of the Tl-201 rest images. The authors conclude that a dual-isotope protocol performed on a CZT camera provides acceptable radiation doses and consistent results, when compared with the conventional single-isotope SPECT-MPI and could serve as a reasonable alternative.
Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) is a proven effective treatment option for patients with drug-refractory heart failure, dilated LV cavity, and electrical dyssynchrony usually demonstrated by prolonged QRS duration and LBBB morphology. Although CRT can improve the quality of life, reduce heart failure-related hospitalization and mortality, or even reverse electromechanical remodeling, 30%-40% patients fail to respond to CRT. Tao and colleagues from Jiangsu, China and Long Beach, Mississippi ( ) apply phase analysis of gated SPECT-MPI to identify the mechanical contraction pattern and evaluate its influence on CRT response in 58 patients with LBBB. The LV contraction pattern was either U-shaped (twenty-eight patients, 48%) or non-U-shaped (thirty patients, 52%). The U-shaped group showed a significantly higher CRT response rate than the non-U-shaped group (90% vs 57%; P = .005). CRT response was defined as an increase in left ventricular ejection fraction ≥ 5% after 6-month follow-up. The authors conclude that the U-shaped contraction pattern was an independent predictor of CRT response and may prove useful for improved patient selection for CRT.
Myocardial uptake of bone tracers are known to have high sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of transthyretin-related cardiac amyloidosis (TTR-CA) and differentiate it from light-chain (AL) amyloidosis. A decreased longitudinal strain in basal segments with a base-to-apex gradient has been described at transthoracic echocardiography and with late gadolinium enhancement at cardiac magnetic resonance imaging in cardiac amyloidosis, suggestive of a segmental amyloid burden. Van Der Gucht and colleagues from Creteil, France ( ), investigate the LV regional distribution of early phase 99m Tc-Hydroxymethylene diphosphonate uptake in 61 patients with transthyretin-related cardiac amyloidosis. In all patients, segmental analysis of the LV myocardial distribution of 99m Tc-HMDP uptake showed an increased median uptake in basal/mid-cavity segments compared to the lowest median uptake of apical segments (apical sparing pattern and base-to-apex gradient). This pattern was similar in the wild-type and hereditary TTR-CA groups and corroborates with the gradient described with transthoracic echocardiography and cardiac MRI.
Owing to the crucial role of SPECT-MPI in CAD and the high levels of radiation involved, dose reduction strategies are critically important. Significant advances, such as three-dimensional iterative reconstruction, may lead to potential reductions in radiation dose; however, the full extent to which such reductions can be made through optimization have not yet been determined. Juan Ramon et al. ( ) examine the diagnostic accuracy of SPECT-MPI as a function of dose reduction, and determine the optimal parameter settings of the reconstruction strategies so as to minimize injected activity without deleterious effect on diagnostic performance. They compare perfusion-defect detection accuracy vs administered dose, ranging from full clinical dose, down to one-eighth of clinical dose, for ordered-subsets expectation maximization (OS-EM) using two different correction settings (attenuation correction-AC, scatter correction-SC, and resolution recovery-RC or SC-RC), and filtered backprojection (FBP) with no correction for degradations. When reducing the administered tracer dose, the detection performance for all reconstruction strategies studied herein progressively decreases, but this decrease is modest down to 25% of the full dose. OS-EM reconstruction with appropriate corrections (AC-SC-RC) achieved higher detection performance than FBP at all dose levels, thus showing the benefits of iterative reconstruction with accounting for physical image-degradation effects. This study indicates that dose reduction by optimization of the image reconstruction algorithm and its parameters could yield a significant reduction in radiation exposure for patients.
The coronary artery calcium (CAC) burden determined from a calcium scoring CT, quantified as the CAC score, is a strong and independent predictor of cardiovascular events (CVE) and adds prognostic and diagnostic information to a MPI scan. Previous studies suggest that CT attenuation correction (CTAC) images that are acquired as a part of PET/CT or SPECT/CT may potentially enable the identification and quantification of atherosclerotic calcifications in the coronary arteries, and thereby allow improved assessment of CVE risk and obviate the need for a dedicated calcium scoring CT. However, CTAC images are not acquired using an optimized protocol for calcium scoring. Excessive motion artifacts, low image resolution, and high levels of image noise make manual calcium scoring in CTAC a tedious task. Hence, an automatic method would be advantageous in clinical routine. Isgum and colleagues ( ), show the feasibility of a novel automated method (using a machine learning algorithm) for calcium scoring applied to CTAC images that are acquired as part of cardiac PET/CT MPI exams in 128 patients. Although the CAC scores in CTAC images were significantly lower than the CAC scores in CSCT, there was good agreement between the cardiovascular disease risk categorization obtained from dedicated CSCT scans compared to the manual and automatic CAC scoring in CTAC images. Their findings suggest that the automated approach may allow routine cardiovascular risk assessment from the CTAC component of PET/CT without any additional radiation dose or scan time.
We encourage the readers to look at the several other articles in the Journal with accompanying scholarly and informative editorials that not only put the findings in perspectives but also outline future directions. We would like to hear your comments as we strive to gain knowledge and in the process, improve patient care.