“A quick glance at selected topics in this issue” aims to highlight contents of the Journal and provide a quick review to the readers. We realize that many of you do not have time to read all journals or attend all national meetings. For that reason, every issue of the JNC includes two types of literature reviews. One summarizing the recent key nuclear cardiology articles that have been published in journals other than ours ( ) while the second outlines select publications in the general cardiovascular disease literature that have relevance to our field ( ).
Other entries include manuscripts on ‘Molecular Imaging of Calcific Aortic Valve Disease’ ( ), a technical discussion on arrhythmia-related artifacts in gated SPECT-MPI, and available quality control tools, focused on count density curves (Technical Corner, ). These manuscripts are complimented by a great selection of original articles with accompanying editorials, brief reports, a CME review paper (Radiopharmaceutical tracers for cardiac imaging, ), ‘What is this image’, and ‘Images that Teach’. Many of the original articles also have power point slides. The abstract of the lead original article on ‘Feasibility and safety of exercise-stress testing’, using an anti-gravity treadmill with Tc-99m tetrofosmin SPECT-MPI’ by Daly and colleagues, has also been translated into Spanish, Chinese, and French in response to requests from the international readership. PowerPoint slides from this paper can be found by searching . The review article by Okada et al. discusses the phenotype of isolated cardiac sarcoidosis, an under-recognized entity ( ). Based on the authors’ review, the rate of isolated cardiac sarcoidosis appears to be approximately 25%. High quality abstracts that will be presented at the upcoming Annual Scientific Session of the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, September 6 to 9, 2018, San Francisco have also been included in the current issue. The Case Presentation Corner this time discusses integration of multimodality imaging in the diagnosis of cardiac amyloidosis ( ). In the second part of the 2-part series, Hage and AlJaroudi summarize a selection of articles focused on SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging that were published in 2017 in the Journal of Nuclear Cardiology ( ). The theme article from Bernard Bendriem and other Siemens Healthineers is on the ‘The continual innovation of commercial PET/CT solutions in nuclear cardiology ( ). Our comments on a few selected papers noted below are therefore only the tip of the iceberg. These manuscripts were selected at random and we sincerely believe all original articles serve a purpose, provide great value, and have undergone an intense peer review.
Exercise is the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology guideline-recommended stress modality for MPI in patients with at least moderate physical function, as exercise capacity is among the best independent predictors of cardiovascular mortality risk. However, nearly half of all patients undergoing stress MPI are unable to complete a conventional treadmill exercise protocol and hence require pharmacologic stress. The AlterG Pro 200 anti-gravity treadmill (AlterG, Fremont, CA) can unweight patients down to 20% of their body weight using lower body positive pressure, thus enabling patients with morbid obesity, musculoskeletal and neurologic conditions to perform exercise beyond what would be possible on a conventional treadmill. Daly and colleagues ( ) for the first time demonstrate the feasibility and safety of exercise-stress testing using an anti-gravity treadmill with Tc-99m tetrofosmin SPECT-MPI in 29 patients and compare to 20 regadenoson stress control patients. 17 anti-gravity test patients (59%) reached target heart rate obviating the need for a pharmacologic stress agent. Adverse effects of the anti-gravity treadmill were limited to minor muscle aches in five subjects. Image quality was comparable between the anti-gravity treadmill vs pharmacologic stress groups.
LV diastolic dysfunction is a marker of early cardiac damage. While alterations of cardiac sympathetic innervation have been classically associated with LV systolic dysfunction, an interaction between impaired cardiac adrenergic activity and LV diastolic dysfunction has also been proposed. Gimelli et al. from Pisa, Italy ( ) assess the relationships between alterations of regional LV adrenergic tone and diastolic dysfunction [measured as peak filling rate (PFR)] from a combined evaluation of resting myocardial innervation ( 123 I-MIBG) and perfusion ( 99m Tc-Tetrofosmin) on a dedicated cardiac CZT-SPECT camera. The authors observe a strong relationship between the severity of LV diastolic dysfunction and impaired myocardial adrenergic tone. The extent of regional innervation/perfusion mismatch (i.e., LV regions showing impaired innervation despite a relatively preserved perfusion) remained an independent predictor of LV diastolic dysfunction.
Zandieh and colleagues from Vienna, Austria ( ) retrospectively demonstrate the clinical utility of separately acquired 18 F-FDG-PET and CMR followed by fusion in the diagnosis of seven cardiac sarcoidosis patients, thereby allowing for a complete morphologic and functional assessment. Whole body 18 F-FDG-PET has the advantage over CMR to identify the extent of systemic disorder and also for treatment monitoring while CMR provides additional complementary information on anatomic morphology and ventricular function.
It is well known that a normal SPECT-MPI study carries a benign prognosis with a 1-year cardiac event rate of less than 1%. Also stress-only imaging provides clear advantages over traditional rest–stress protocols including decreased duration of the test, both for the patients and for the laboratory, and a lower radiation dose. However, currently there are no published guidelines to identify patients that are candidates for a stress-first protocol. The same investigators ( ) had previously validated and proposed a more cumbersome pre-test scoring model (that is based on eight demographic and clinical variables, i.e., Emergency Department location, age > 65, diabetes mellitus, typical chest pain, history of CHF, abnormal resting ECG, male sex, and documented CAD) for the selection of patients who can successfully undergo a stress-first MPI study. In the current study, the authors find that triaging patients based only on CAD status is much simpler with improved predictive accuracy of 79% in allowing for the adoption of stress-first imaging protocols when compared to the earlier proposed pre-test scoring model (accuracy 69%).
99m-Technetium pyrophosphate (TcPYP) is the only FDA approved radionuclide available in the United States for off-label use in diagnosis of transthyretin (ATTR) cardiac amyloidosis. Nuclear imaging diagnosis is based on semiquantitative visual scoring of cardiac tracer retention vis-a-vis the bone/ribs and quantitative analysis of heart tracer retention (heart to contralateral [H/CL] ratio). Vranian and colleagues from the Cleveland Clinic Foundation ( ), examine the association between TcPYP uptake intensity and echocardiographic measures of disease severity and clinical outcomes. 48 out of 75 patients referred for evaluation of suspected cardiac amyloidosis were diagnosed with ATTR based upon findings from three different areas: appropriate clinical presentation, TcPYP scintigraphy, and non-nuclear techniques (endomyocardial biopsy, TTR genetic testing, CMR, and/or echocardiography with strain). The authors find that neither the semiquantitative score nor the H/CL ratio was associated with the measured echocardiographic parameters of advanced ATTR cardiomyopathy. The H/CL ratio was associated with both all-cause mortality and a composite of all-cause mortality or heart failure hospitalization in all patients undergoing TcPYP scintigraphy. However, there was no association between H/CL ratio and either outcome when only patients with a semiquantitative score > 1 and confirmed ATTR were analyzed. The lack of association between H/CL ratio and poor outcomes, suggests that while TcPYP scintigraphy is useful in the diagnosis of cardiac amyloidosis, it does not appear to be a useful prognostic tool.
MPI is an established non-invasive imaging modality for the diagnosis and prognosis of patients with or at risk for coronary artery disease. It also provides valuable insight into decision-making and serves to guide revascularization. However, its role in the elderly is debated. Nudi et al. ( ) study the prognostic accuracy of myocardial perfusion imaging in the elderly/octogenarians and compare with patients less than 80 years age (13,254 patients, 12,737 (96.1%) were < 80 years old and 517 (3.9%) ≥ 80 years). The authors confirm that elderly patients had a six-fold higher risk of death in comparison to nonelderly patients (9.1% vs 1.4%, P < .001) and a four-fold higher risk of death or myocardial infarction (11.0% vs 2.6%, P < .001). Most importantly, they find that MPI has similar or better prognostic accuracy (risk of death or myocardial infarction) in octogenarians than in younger patients, confirming the pivotal role of this non-invasive imaging modality.
Takotsubo or stress-induced cardiomyopathy is a syndrome of transient acute regional LV systolic dysfunction beyond a single epicardial vascular distribution, predominantly involving the midcavity and apex, that mimics an acute myocardial infarction with new ST-segment elevation or T-wave inversion, but without angiographic obstructive coronary artery disease, acute plaque rupture, or other causes of similar LV wall motion abnormalities (e.g., pheochromocytoma, myocarditis, etc.). Kobylecka and colleagues from the Medical University of Warsaw, Poland ( ), study the 18 F-FDG cardiac uptake pattern in 18 fasting Takotsubo cardiomyopathy patients and correlate the results with 99mTc-MIBI perfusion scintigraphy and echocardiography. Transthoracic echocardiography showed an abnormal contractile pattern in all patients, i.e., preserved basal function and apical akinesia/ dyskinesia. In 10/18 patients, the investigators noted decreased 18 F-FDG uptake in the apical myocardium with preserved 18 F-FDG myocardial activity elsewhere. 7/10 of these patients had a mild apical perfusion defect and 3/10 had normal perfusion. The remaining eight patients demonstrated apical hypermetabolism with normal perfusion in seven patients and a minor apical perfusion defect in one patient. The authors hypothesize that the two differing perfusion/metabolism patterns are probably related to disease severity and stunning, i.e., apical hypermetabolism with normal or slightly reduced perfusion a manifestation of transient vasospasm with rapid recovery and those with relatively reduced apical 18 F-FDG uptake and high myocardial metabolic activity elsewhere often with reduced apical perfusion, a sequela of vasospasm with delayed recovery.
Amirian and colleagues ( ) make a case for exercise treadmill testing (ETT) over stress myocardial perfusion imaging (sMPI) for low-risk chest pain patients observed in the clinical decision unit. 680 propensity score-matched (by age, gender, pre-test likelihood, Duke Treadmill score, and test results) low-risk chest pain patients were included. The majority of ETT and sMPI tests (98%) were normal. There were no cardiac deaths. MACE rates were low (1.47% at 72 hours and 1% at 1 year) and not different for ETT vs sMPI. The sMPI reduced additional testing, but resulted in greater expense ($3168.70 vs $2226.96) and longer length of stay (> 24 hours, 4.71% vs 2.06%) when compared to ETT.
Normally, the post exercise-stress gated SPECT LVEF is expected to increase or remain unchanged compared to a resting state. A decrease in LVEF (by ≤ 5%) on post exercise-stress gated SPECT-MPI has been associated with severe/extensive CAD. The diagnostic and prognostic significance of a decrease in gated SPECT LVEF after regadenoson stress has not been studied. Gomez et al. ( ) demonstrate, in patients undergoing rest/regadenoson stress gated SPECT-MPI and selected for coronary angiography, that a decrease in post-regadenoson stress LVEF has poor discriminative capacity for severe/extensive CAD and has no discernible prognostic value in predicting MACE (composite of cardiac death or MI) or coronary revascularization, beyond the MPI findings. This was irrespective of whether a 5% or 10% threshold was used to define a significant decline in LVEF.
Inflammation related hot spot imaging with suppression of physiologic myocardial glucose metabolism forms the basis of 18 F FDG -PET in cardiac inflammation/infection. Adequate attenuation of physiologic myocardial glucose uptake is necessary to ensure high quality FDG-PET images and can be challenging to accomplish, since glucose can be physiologically taken up by the cardiomyocytes. Assuero et al. from Pisa, Italy ( ) conduct a retrospective study to explore whether anticoagulants other than unfractionated heparin (UFH) namely lower molecular weight heparin (LMWH) and warfarin could also suppress physiologic myocardial glucose utilization. The investigators found that a significant proportion of patients who were on LMWH or warfarin exhibited optimal suppression of 18 F-FDG myocardial uptake (78%) vs only 13% of those who did not receive any anticoagulants ( P < .001). This is the first study showing that a combination of fasting (> 12-hours) and chronic anticoagulant use, other than UFH, can provide optimal quality FDG-PET images in a vast majority of patients and thus offer additional pharmacologic options to minimize physiologic cardiac glucose metabolism. It is noteworthy that the rate of unsatisfactory myocardial 18F-FDG suppression in the fasting plus anticoagulant group was not negligible (22%).
We encourage the readers to look at the several other articles in the Journal with accompanying scholarly and informative editorials that not only put the findings in perspectives but also outline future directions. We would like to hear your comments as we strive to gain knowledge and in the process, improve patient care.